



[Cites 
10
, Cited by 
81
]




Himachal Pradesh High Court


Dharam Pal Singh vs State Of H.P. And Others on 26 March, 2015


Author: 
Tarlok Singh Chauhan


Bench: 
Tarlok Singh Chauhan


    IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH, SHIMLA

                                                          CWP No. 4451 of 2013




                                                                                .

                                                          Date of decision: 26.3.2015





    Dharam Pal Singh                                                            ...Petitioner.





                                        Versus
    State of H.P. and others                                                     ..Respondents.





    Coram


    The Hon'ble Mr. Justice Tarlok Singh Chauhan, Judge.



    Whether approved for reporting ?1 No


    For the Petitioner                  :        Mr. B. S. Chauhan, Advocate.



    For the Respondents                 :        Mr. Virender Kumar Verma , Addl.

                                                 Advocate General with Ms. Parul Negi, Dy.

                                                 Advocate General.



    Tarlok Singh Chauhan, Judge ( Oral )




                       By way of present writ petition, the petitioner has claimed the





    following reliefs:



                       "1) That the writ of certiorari be issued to set aside the advertisement





                       dated 5.6.2013 (Annexure P-4) in view of the submissions made
                       hereinabove.

                       2.) That the writ of mandamus be issued directing the respondents to
                       allow the petitioner to work in the college as Lecturer (Computer
                       Science) till regular appointments are made."



    2.                 The petitioner having obtained a degree in Master of

    Computers Application in first division came to be appointed as Lecturer

    in the respondent No.3-College (on period basis). This appointment was

    pursuant to an advertisement issued in this regard in the local daily and it

    was only after undergoing a selection process by appearing before a duly


    1

        Whether reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the Judgment ? Yes





                                                             ::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 17:53:33 :::HCHP


                                          2



    constituted Committee that the petitioner came to be appointed. The

    petitioner continued to work for two years but thereafter the respondent




                                                                .

    No.3 again advertised the same post on similar conditions i.e. period





    basis to which the petitioner has taken exception and approached this





    Court contending that the action of the respondents amounts to replacing

    a contractual employee by another set of contract appointee.



    3.           The respondents have filed the reply and have stated that




    the petitioner was initially engaged on 4.7.2011 to teach the B.C.A.

    courses purely on temporary basis for the academic session 2011-2012

    and he worked as such till 24.4.2012. The petitioner was again engaged

    on 21.6.2012 on the same terms and conditions for the academic session

    2012-2013 and worked as such upto 4.4.2013. It is then alleged that in



    the terms and conditions of appointment of the petitioner, it has been

    specifically stated that he is not entitled to claim any financial or service




    benefit and therefore, the petitioner cannot be permitted to continue





    teaching especially when the academic session for which he had been





    engaged has already ended.



    4.           I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have also

    gone through the records of the case carefully.



    5.           The short question which arises for consideration is as to

    whether the respondents can be permitted to replace the petitioner by

    another contract appointee especially when the petitioner is duly qualified

    and has been engaged after due selection and his integrity as well as

    work and conduct has been duly certified time and again. It is true that

    the petitioner may not have a right to be appointed as a permanent

    employee at this stage, but this Court cannot shut its eyes to the fact that





                                             ::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 17:53:33 :::HCHP


                                                3



    he has been working on contract basis for more than two years to the

    satisfaction of the respondents' authorities.



                                                                       .

 
6.            Dispensing of services of the petitioner after the completion





    of his contract period is nothing short of termination. The services of the





    petitioner are sought to be replaced by another contract employee which

    as held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in 
State of Haryana and others

    vs. Piara Singh and others
 (1992) 4 SCC 118, is not permissible in law.




    reads thus:

                      r               to
    It is apt to reproduce the paragraphs 45, 46 and 47 of the report which

                  "45. The normal rule, of course, is regular recruitment through the
                  prescribed agency but exigencies of administration may sometimes call
                  for an adhoc or temporary appointment to be made. In such a situation,


                  effort should always be to replace such an adhoc/temporary employee
                  by a regularly selected employee as early as possible. Such a
                  temporary employee may also compete along with others for such




                  regular selection/appointment. If he gets selected, well and good, but if
                  he does not, he must give way to the regularly selected candidate. The





                  appointment of the regularly selected candidate cannot be withheld or
                  kept in abeyance for the sake of such an adhoc/temporary employee.



                  46. Secondly, an adhoc or temporary employee should not be replaced
                  by another adhoc or temporary employee; he must be replaced only by
                  a regularly selected employee. This is necessary to avoid arbitrary
                  action on the part of the appointing authority.



                  47. Thirdly, even where an adhoc or temporary employment is
                  necessitated on account of the exigencies of administration, he should
                  ordinarily be drawn from the employment exchange unless it cannot
                  brook delay in which case the pressing cause must be stated on the file.
                  If no candidate is available or is not sponsored by the employment
                  exchange, some appropriate method consistent with the requirements of
                  
Article 16
 should be followed. In other words, there must be a notice
                  published in the appropriate manner calling for applications and all
                  those who apply in response thereto should be considered fairly."



                                                    ::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 17:53:33 :::HCHP


                                            4


    7.          Indisputably, the respondent No.3 is a Government College

    and, therefore, cannot be permitted to not only indulge in unfair practice




                                                                  .

 
but it also cannot be permitted to take advantage of its sheer strength of





    bargaining power. The Division Bench of this Court in LPA No. 132 of





    2014 in 
Dr. Lok Pal vs. State of H.P. and others
, (of which I was one of

    the member), was seized of the matter where though the appellant

    therein had been appointed on a consolidated salary of ` 43,000/- per



    this Court held as under:


                     r              to
    month in terms of the advertisement but was actually paid ` 21,000/- and



                "7.This case reflects a sorry state of affairs where the

                respondents on the sheer strength of its bargaining power
                have taken advantage of their position and imposed wholly
                un-equitable and unreasonable condition of employment on



                their prospective employees, who did not have any other
                choice but to accept the employment on the terms and




                conditions offered by the respondents.             This action of the
                respondents is violative of 
Article 14
 of the Constitution.



 
Here it is apt to reproduce relevant observations of the
                Hon'ble Supreme Court in the celebrated decision of 
Central





                Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd. Vs. Brojo Nath
                Ganguly and another
, (1986) 3 SCC 156, which reads as
                under:-


                       "88.     As seen above, apart from judicial decisions, the
                       United States and the United Kingdom have statutorily
                       recognized, at least in certain areas of the law of contracts,
                       that there can be unreasonableness (or lack of fairness, if
                       one prefers that phrase) in a contract or a clause in a
                       contract where there is inequality of bargaining power
                       between the parties although arising out of circumstances
                       not within their control or as a result of situations not of
                       their creation. Other legal systems also permit judicial
                       review of a contractual transaction entered into in similar
                       circumstances. For example, section 138(2) of the German
                       Civil Code provides that a transaction is void "when a





                                               ::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 17:53:33 :::HCHP


                            5



        person" exploits "the distressed situation, inexperience,
        lack of judgmental ability, or grave weakness of will of
        another to obtain the grant or promise of pecuniary




                                                  .

        advantages........which are obviously disproportionate to the





        performance given in return." The position according to the
        French law is very much the same.



        89. Should then our courts not advance with the times?
        Should they still continue to cling to outmoded concepts
        and outworn ideologies? Should we not adjust our thinking
        caps to match the fashion of the day? Should all





        jurisprudential   development    pass     us    by,   leaving     us
        floundering in the sloughs of nineteenth-century theories?
        Should the strong be permitted to push the weak to the

        wall? Should they be allowed to ride roughshod over the

        weak? Should the courts sit back and watch supinely while
        the strong trample under-foot the rights of the weak? We
        have a Constitution for our country. Our judges are bound
        by their oath to "uphold the Constitution and the laws". The



        Constitution was enacted to secure to all the citizens of this
        country social and economic justice. 
Article 14
 of the




        Constitution guarantees to all persons equality before the
        law and the equal protection of the laws. The principle





        deducible from the above discussions on this part of the
        case is in consonance with right and reason, intended to
        secure social and economic justice and conforms to the





        mandate of the great equality clause in 
Art. 14.
 This
        principle is that, the courts will not enforce and will, when
        called upon to do so, strike down an unfair and
        unreasonable contract, or an unfair and unreasonable
        clause in a contract, entered into between parties who are
        not equal in bargaining power. It is difficult to give an
        exhaustive list of all bargains of this type. No court can
        visualize the different situations which can arise in the
        affairs of men. One can only attempt to give some
        illustrations. For instance, the above principle will apply
        where the inequality of bargaining power is the result of the
        great disparity in the economic strength of the contracting
        parties. It will apply where the inequality is the result of
        circumstances, whether of the creation of the parties or not.
        It will apply to situations in which the weaker party is in a





                               ::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 17:53:33 :::HCHP


                                  6



              position in which he can obtain goods or services or means
              of livelihood only upon the terms imposed by the stronger
              party or go without them. It will also apply where a man has




                                                        .

              no choice, or rather no meaningful choice, but to give his





              assent to a contract or to sign on the dotted line in a
              prescribed or standard form or to accept a set of rules as
              part of the contract, however unfair, unreasonable and





              unconscionable a clause in that contract or form or rules
              may be. This principle, however, will not apply where the
              bargaining power of the contracting parties is equal or





              almost equal. This principle may not apply where both
              parties are businessmen and the contract is a commercial
              transaction. In today's complex world of giant corporations
              with their vast infra-structural organizations and with the

              State through its instrumentalities and agencies entering

              into almost every branch of industry and commerce, there
              can be myriad situations which result in unfair and
              unreasonable bargains between parties possessing wholly


              disproportionate and unequal bargaining power. These
              cases can neither be enumerated nor fully illustrated. The
              court must judge each case on its, own facts and




              circumstances."



        In terms of the aforesaid exposition of law, it is clear that this
        Court has the jurisdiction and power to strike or set aside the





        unfavourable term of contract of employment which purports
        to give effect to unreasonable bargain violating 
Article 14
 of
        the Constitution.

        8. The undertaking obtained from the appellant is so unfair
        and unreasonable that it shocks the conscious of this Court.
        It reflects the inequality of the bargaining power between the
        appellant and the respondents which emanates from the
        great disparity in the economic strength between the job
        seeker and job giver.

        9.The appellant was compelled by circumstances to accept
        the offer made by the respondents, but then the mere
        acceptance of this offer would not give it a stamp of approval
        regarding its validity. It is an age old maxim that "necessity
        knows no law" and a person sometimes may have to





                                     ::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 17:53:33 :::HCHP


                                   7



        succumb to pressure of the other party to bargain who is in
        stronger position.     Although, it may not be strictly in place,
        but the Court cannot shut its eyes to this ground reality.



                                                         .

 
10.   At this stage, it shall be apt to quote the following





        observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in 
Chairman and
        MD NTPC Ltd. Vs. Rashmi Construction Builders and





        Contractors
 (2004) 2 SCC 663:-


              "28.      Further, necessitas non habet legem is an age-old
              maxim which means necessity knows no law. A person may
              sometimes have to succumb to the pressure of the other





              party to the bargain who is in a stronger position."



        11.Notably the respondents herein are none other than the

        functionaries of the State who are expected to function like a

        model employer. A model employer is under an obligation to
        conduct itself with high probity and expected candour and
        the employer, who is duty bound to act as a model employer


        has social obligation to treat an employee in an appropriate
        manner so that an employee is not condemned to feel totally
        subservient to the situation. A model employer should not




        exploit   its    employees    and    take     advantage         of    their





        helplessness and misery. The conduct of the respondents
        falls short of expectation of a model employer.



 
12. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in its decision in 
Bhupendra
        Nath Hazarika and another Vs. State of Assam and others
,
        (2013) 2 SCC 516 has succinctly explained this position in
        the following terms:-


              "61. Before parting with the case, we are compelled to
              reiterate the oft stated principle that the State is a model
              employer and it is required to act fairly giving due regard
              and respect to the rules framed by it. But in the present
              case, the State has atrophied the rules. Hence, the need for
              hammering the concept.

 
62. Almost a quarter century back, this Court in 
Balram
              Gupta V. Union of India
 1987 Supp SCC 228 had observed
              thus: (SCC p. 236, para 13)


                                      ::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 17:53:33 :::HCHP


                             8


                "13.... As a model employer the Government must
                conduct itself with high probity and candour with its
                employees."



                                                    .



 
In 
State of Haryana V. Piara Singh
 (1992) 4 SCC 118 the
        Court had clearly stated: (SCC p. 134, para 21).


                "21....The main concern of the court in such matters





                is to ensure the rule of law and to see that the
                Executive acts fairly and gives a fair deal to its
                employees consistent with the requirements of
                
Articles 14
 and 
16."




        63.


                
In 
State of Karnataka V. Umadevi
 (3) (2006) 4 SCC 1
        (SCC P. 18, para 6) the Constitution Bench, while discussing

        the role of State in recruitment procedure, stated that if

        rules   have   been     made    under     Article    3089     of   the
        Constitution, then the Government can make appointments
        only in accordance with the rules, for the State is meant to
        be a model employer.




        64.     
In 
Mehar Chand Polytechnic V. Anu Lamba
 (2006) 7
        SCC 161 (SCC p. 166, para 16) the Court observed that
        public employment is a facet of right to equality envisaged




        under 
Article 16
 of the Constitution of India and that the





        recruitment rules are framed with a view to give equal
        opportunity to al the citizens of India entitled for being
        considered for recruitment in the vacant posts.




        65. We have stated the role of the State as a model employer
        with the fond hope that in future a deliberate disregard is
        not taken recourse to and deviancy of such magnitude is
        not adopted to frustrate the claims of the employees.                It
        should always be borne in mind that legitimate aspirations
        of the employees are not guillotined and a situation is not
        created where hopes end in despair. Hope for everyone is
        gloriously precious and a model employer should not
        convert it to be deceitful and treacherous by playing a game
        of chess with their seniority. A sense of calm sensibility
        and concerned sincerity should be reflected in every step.
        An atmosphere of trust has to prevail and when the
        employees are absolutely sure that their trust shall not be
        betrayed and they shall be treated with dignified fairness





                                 ::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 17:53:33 :::HCHP


                                          9



                        then only the concept of good governance can be
                        concretised. We say no more."



                                                                .

 
The position in this case is no different from that of 
Dr. Lok Pal
's case





    (supra).




    8.           The Central Government, State Governments and likewise





    all Public Sector undertakings are expected to function like model

    employers. A model employer is under an obligation to conduct itself with





    high probity and expected candour. An employer who is duty bound to

    act as a model employer has social obligation to treat an employee in an

    appropriate manner so that an employee is not condemned to feel totally

    subservient to the situation. A model employer should not exploit the

    employees and take advantage of their helplessness and misery.



    9.           Ex-consequenti the present petition is allowed and the

    advertisement dated 5.6.2013 (Annexure P-4) issued by the respondent




    No.3 is quashed and set-aside and the respondents are directed to allow





    the petitioner to work in the College as Lecturer (Computer Science) till





    regular appointments are made or till such time that the petitioner himself

    does not incur any disqualification from holding the post.



                 Accordingly, the present petition stands disposed of in the

    aforesaid terms, so also the pending application(s), if any. The parties are

    left to bear their own costs.



    March 26, 2015                                    ( Tarlok Singh Chauhan),
          (GR)                                                 Judge





                                             ::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 17:53:33 :::HCHP

 

