



[Cites 
6
, Cited by 
19
]




Himachal Pradesh High Court


Sarita Sharma vs State Of H.P. And Another on 25 February, 2020


Author: 
Tarlok Singh Chauhan


Bench: 
Tarlok Singh Chauhan


    IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH, SHIMLA

                                                 CWPOA No. 242 of 2019.




                                                                                .
                                                 Decided on: 25.02.2020.





    Sarita Sharma                                                               ...Petitioner





                                              Versus
    State of H.P. and another                                                   ..Respondents
    ______________________________________________________
    Coram


    Whether approved for reporting ?1 No
                             r                to
    The Hon'ble Mr. Justice Tarlok Singh Chauhan, Judge.

    For the Petitioner                :             Mr. Prem P. Chauhan, Advocate.

    For the Respondents :                           Mr. Ajay Vaidya, Senior Additional
                                                    Advocate General, with Mr. Vinod


                                                    Thakur, Mr. Desh Raj Thakur, Addl.
                                                    Advocate Generals, Mr. Bhupinder
                                                    Thakur and Mr. Narinder Thakur,
                                                    Deputy Advocate Generals.






    Tarlok Singh Chauhan, Judge (oral)



                         The moot question in this petition is whether the





    services of an employee appointed on adhoc basis followed by

    regular appointment is to be counted for the purpose of

    pensionary benefits.



    2.                 The facts are not in dispute. Pursuant to the interview

    held by the duly constituted Selection Committee on 25.6.1983,

    1

        Whether reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the Judgment ? Yes





                                                             ::: Downloaded on - 26/02/2020 20:23:44 :::HCHP


                                           2



    the petitioner came to be appointed as Trained Graduate Teacher

    (for short 'TGT) and joined as such on 17.04.1985. Thereafter her




                                                                   .

    services came to be regularised only on 23.08.1994 despite her





    appointment having been made against a sanctioned post. 
In the





    interregnum, some of the aggrieved persons whose adhoc

    services were not counted for the purpose of regularisation





    approached this Court by way of CWP No. 372 of 1985 titled as

    
Surinder Kumar and others vs. State of H.P. and another
,

    wherein this Court on 04.03.1986 passed the following directions:




               "4. The petitioners have claimed that the period of adhoc
               service rendered by them should be tagged on to their regular
               service in case of regularisation of their services for the



               purposes of seniority, fixation of pay etc. The Court does not
               propose to issue any directions on this question at the present




               stage. Such of the adhoc teachers, whose services may be
               regularised, including the petitioners, will be at liberty to make





               representation(s) to the State Government in regard to this
               matter within a period         of four weeks from the date of





               regularisation. The representation(s), if and when made, shall
               be entertained and decided in accordance with law within a
               period of eight weeks thereafter. If the concerned persons are
               aggrieved by the decision, they would be at liberty to move the
               Court again."



    3.         In   compliance       to       the    above        directions,        the

    respondents acceded to the request of the petitioners therein and





                                                ::: Downloaded on - 26/02/2020 20:23:44 :::HCHP


                                           3



    directed the counting of the adhoc services rendered by the

    petitioners therein for all purposes. However, the benefit of this




                                                                  .

    decision was only confined to the petitioners in CWP No. 372 of





    1985 and not to the other similarly situated persons, constraining





    the petitioner to file the instant petition for the grant of following

    substantive reliefs:



                (a)   To issue a writ of mandamus, appropriate writ, order or
                direction   in   nature   thereof,   directing     the    respondent
                department to grant the benefits of entire adhoc service

                rendered by the petitioner towards her seniority for all purpose

                and intents, including for grant of proficiency step ups,
                Assured Career Progression Scheme benefits and all other
                consequential benefits flowing thereof with arrears and interest


                thereon @ 18% p.a.

                (b)   To issue an appropriate writ, order or direction in nature
                thereof to give full justice to the petitioner in the circumstances




                of the case and may pass such further writ, order or orders as
                this Hon'ble Court may deem fit, proper, just and expedient in





                the circumstances of the case."



    4.          The only ground taken by the respondents to oppose

    the claim of the petitioner is that the adhoc services rendered by

    the petitioner without break followed by regular appointment is to

    be counted towards increments on notional basis and not for

    assigning seniority. Therefore, the petitioner is not entitled for the

    grant of benefits of adhoc services rendered by her towards her





                                               ::: Downloaded on - 26/02/2020 20:23:44 :::HCHP


                                         4



    seniority for all intents including for the grant of proficiency step

    up, Assured Career Progression Scheme benefits etc. and the




                                                               .

    petitioner will be entitled for seniority and pay fixation only from





    the date of regular appointment.



    5.          The basis for making such averments have not been

    set-out in the reply nor could orally explained by the respondents





    during the course of arguments.



    6.          
In fact, the issue posed in this petition is no longer

    res integra in view of the decision rendered by learned Single

    Judge of this Court in 
Paras Ram vs. State of Himachal

    Pradesh and others
, Latest HLJ 2009 (HP) 887 wherein it was



    laid down that if adhoc service is followed by regular service in

    the same post, the said service can be counted for the purpose of




    increments.




 
7.          Further a Division Bench of this Court in LPA No. 36





    of 2010 titled 
Sita Ram vs. State of H.P. and others
, decided on

    15.7.2010 after placing reliance upon 
Paras Ram
's case (supra)

    held that "It is also settled principle of law that any service that is

    counted for the purpose of increment, will count for pension also.




    To that extent the appellant is justified in making submission that





                                            ::: Downloaded on - 26/02/2020 20:23:44 :::HCHP


                                       5



    period may be treated as qualifying service for the purpose of

    pension also."



                                                             .

    8.         Adverting to the facts of the case, I have no difficulty





    in concluding that even though the appointment of the petitioner





    was on adhoc basis but that was in no manner qualitatively

    different from the regular employees and particularly when there





    was a vacancy and need for the services of the petitioner and she

    was ultimately regularized. Once that be so, then obviously it was

    unfair on the part of the respondents to take work from the

    petitioner on adhoc basis. They ought to have resorted to an

    appointment on regular basis.



    9.         The taking of work on adhoc basis for long amounts

    to adopting the exploitative device. Later on, though the services




    of the petitioner have been regularized, however, the period spent





    by her on adhoc basis, has not been counted towards the





    qualifying service. Thus, the respondents have not only deprived

    the petitioner from the due emoluments during the period she

    served on less salary on adhoc basis but she was also deprived

    of counting of the period for pensionary benefits.



    10.        The respondents have been benefitted by the

    services rendered by the petitioner in the heydays of her life on





                                          ::: Downloaded on - 26/02/2020 20:23:44 :::HCHP


                                       6



    less salary on adhoc basis. Therefore, there is no rhyme or

    reason not to count the adhoc period in case it has been




                                                             .

    rendered before regularization. If the same is denied, it would be





    highly unjust, impermissible and irrational to deprive such





    employees benefit of the qualifying service.



    11.         The classification cannot be done on the irrational





    basis and when the respondents are themselves counting period

    spent in such service, it would be highly discriminatory not to

    count the service on the basis of flimsy classification. As it would

    rather be unjust, illegal, impermissible to make the aforesaid

    classification under the Pension Rules and to make Rule valid



    and non-discriminatory, the same will have to be read down and

    it has to be held that services rendered even prior to




    regularisation in the capacity of adhoc shall have to be counted





    towards the qualifying service even if such service is not





    preceded by temporary or regular appointment in a pensionable

    establishment.



    12.         
In a recent decision rendered by three Judges of the

    Hon'ble Supreme Court in 
Prem Singh vs. State of Uttar

    Pradesh and others
 AIR 2019 SC 4390, it was held that the

    services rendered on contract basis followed by regular





                                          ::: Downloaded on - 26/02/2020 20:23:44 :::HCHP


                                          7



    appointment have to be counted towards qualifying service for the

    purpose of pension. It shall be apposite to refer to the




                                                                .


    observations made in paras 28 to 34 of the judgment, which read





    as under:



                "28. The submission has been urged on behalf of the State
                of Uttar Pradesh to differentiate the case between work-
                charged employees and regular employees on the ground





                that due procedure is not followed for appointment of work
                charged employees, they do not have that much work
                pressure, they are unequal and cannot be treated equally,

                work- charged employees form a totally different class, their

                work is materially and qualitatively different, there cannot be
                any clubbing of the services of the work-charged employees
                with the regular service and vice versa, if a work-charged



                employee is treated as in the regular service it will dilute the
                basic concept of giving incentive and reward to a permanent




                and responsible regular employee.

                29.    We are not impressed by the aforesaid submissions.



                The appointment of the work-charged employee in question
                had been made on monthly salary and they were required to





                cross the efficiency bar also. How their services are
                qualitatively different from regular employees? No material
                indicating qualitative difference has been pointed out except
                making bald statement. The appointment was not made for a
                particular project which is the basic concept of the work
                charged employees. Rather, the very concept of work-
                charged employment has been misused by offering the
                employment on exploitative terms for the work which is
                regular and perennial in nature. The work-charged employees





                                             ::: Downloaded on - 26/02/2020 20:23:44 :::HCHP


                                 8



        had been subjected to transfer from one place to another like
        regular employees as apparent from documents placed on
        record. 
In 
Narain Dutt Sharma & Ors. v. State of Uttar





                                                        .


        Pradesh & Ors. (CA No. 2019 @ SLP (C) No.5775 of 2018)





        the appellants were allowed to cross efficiency bar, after '8'
        years of continuous service, even during the period of work-



        charged services. Narain Dutt Sharma, the appellant, was
        appointed as a work-charged employee as Gej Mapak w.e.f
        15.9.1978. Payment used to be made monthly but the





        appointment was made in the pay scale of Rs.200- 320.
        Initially, he was appointed in the year 1978 on a fixed monthly
        salary of Rs.205 per month. They were allowed to cross
        efficiency bar also as the benefit of pay scale was granted to

        them during the period they served as work-charged

        employees they served for three to four decades and later on
        services have been regularized time to time by different
        orders. However, the services of some of the appellants in



        few petitions/ appeals have not been regularized even though
        they had served for several decades and ultimately reached




        the age of superannuation.

        30.   In the aforesaid facts and circumstances, it was unfair





        on the part of the State Government and its officials to take
        work from the employees on the work-charged basis. They





        ought to have resorted to an appointment on regular basis.
        The taking of work on the work- charged basis for long
        amounts to adopting the exploitative device. Later on, though
        their services have been regularized. However, the period
        spent by them in the work-charged establishment has not
        been counted towards the qualifying service. Thus, they have
        not only been deprived of their due emoluments during the
        period they served on less salary in work charged
        establishment but have also been deprived of counting of the





                                     ::: Downloaded on - 26/02/2020 20:23:44 :::HCHP


                                     9



        period for pensionary benefits as if no services had been
        rendered by them. The State has been benefitted by the
        services rendered by them in the heydays of their life on less




                                                             .

        salary in work- charged establishment.



        31.    In view of the note appended to Rule 3(8) of the 1961
        Rules, there is a provision to count service spent on work





        charged, contingencies or non pensionable service, in case, a
        person has rendered such service in a given between period
        of    two   temporary   appointments          in    the    pensionable





        establishment    or   has       rendered    such     service     in    the
        interregnum two periods of temporary and permanent
        employment. The work-charged service can be counted as
        qualifying service for pension in the aforesaid exigencies.



        32.    The question arises whether the imposition of rider that

        such service to be counted has to be rendered in-between
        two spells of temporary or temporary and permanent service
        is legal and proper. We find that once regularization had been



        made on vacant posts, though the employee had not served
        prior to that on temporary basis, considering the nature of




        appointment, though it was not a regular appointment it was
        made on monthly salary and thereafter in the pay scale of





        work-charged establishment the efficiency bar was permitted
        to be crossed. It would be highly discriminatory and irrational





        because of the rider contained in Note to Rule 3(8) of 1961
        Rules, not to count such service particularly, when it can be
        counted, in case such service is sandwiched between two
        temporary or in-between temporary and permanent services.
        There is no rhyme or reason not to count the service of work-
        charged period in case it has been rendered before
        regularisation. In our opinion, an impermissible classification
        has been made under Rule 3(8). It would be highly unjust,
        impermissible and irrational to deprive such employees





                                         ::: Downloaded on - 26/02/2020 20:23:44 :::HCHP


                                          10



                benefit of the qualifying service. Service of work-charged
                period remains the same for all the employees, once it is to
                be counted for one class, it has to be counted for all to




                                                                 .

                prevent discrimination. The classification cannot be done on





                the irrational basis and when respondents are themselves
                counting period spent in such service, it would be highly





                discriminatory not to count the service on the basis of flimsy
                classification. The rider put on that work-charged service
                should have preceded by temporary capacity is discriminatory





                and irrational and creates an impermissible classification.

                33.   As it would be unjust, illegal and impermissible to make
                aforesaid classification to make the Rule 3(8) valid and non
                discriminatory, we have to read down the provisions of Rule

                3(8) and hold that services rendered even prior to

                regularisation in the capacity of work-charged employees,
                contingency paid fund employees or non- pensionable
                establishment shall also be counted towards the qualifying



                service even if such service is not preceded by temporary or
                regular appointment in a pensionable establishment.



                34.   In view of the note appended to Rule 3(8), which we
                have read down, the provision contained in Regulation 370 of





                the Civil Services Regulations has to be struck down as also
                the instructions contained in Para 669 of the Financial





                Handbook."



    13.        It would be clearly evident from the aforesaid

    judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court that the services

    rendered prior to regularisation in any capacity be it work-charged

    employees, contingency paid fund employees or non-pensionable

    establishment or adhoc has to be counted towards qualifying





                                              ::: Downloaded on - 26/02/2020 20:23:44 :::HCHP


                                       11



    service even if such service is not preceded by temporary or

    regular appointment in a pensionable establishment.



                                                              .

    14.         Once that be so, obviously no discrimination can be





    made qua the employees, who rendered services prior to





    regularisation in the capacity of adhoc employees.



 
15.         Similar reiteration of law can be found in a judgment





    rendered by a co-ordinate Bench of this Court in CWP No.3267 of

    2019, titled Ram Krishan Sharma vs. The Accountant General

    (A&E), HP and Ors., decided on 01.01.2020 and a very recent

    judgment rendered by this Court in CWP No. 537 of 2018, titled

    
Kedar Singh Negi vs. H.P. High
 Court and others, decided on



    07.01.2020.




    16.         In view of the aforesaid discussion, I find merit in this




    petition and the same is accordingly allowed. The respondents





    are directed to grant the benefit of entire adhoc service rendered





    by the petitioner towards her seniority for all intents and purposes

    including   grant   of   proficiency   step-up,        Assured         Career

    Progression Scheme benefits and all other consequential benefits

    flowing thereof within a period of three months from today, failing

    which, the respondents shall be liable to pay an interest of 9%





                                           ::: Downloaded on - 26/02/2020 20:23:44 :::HCHP


                                         12



    per annum, which initially shall be paid by the department, to be

    recovered from the erring official(s).



                                                                .

    17.            For compliance, list on 26.05.2020.



    18.            The petition is disposed of in the aforesaid terms, so





    also the pending application(s) if any, leaving the parties to bear

    their own costs.



      th
    25 February, 2020.

            (GR)
                       r          to          (Tarlok Singh Chauhan)
                                                        Judge










                                             ::: Downloaded on - 26/02/2020 20:23:44 :::HCHP

 

