



[Cites 
18
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Administrative Tribunal - Patna


Ramashish vs Railway on 10 April, 2024


                                  ::1::      OA 708/2016/CAT/PATNA BENCH


               CENTRAL ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
                     PATNA BENCH, PATNA
                      O.A. No. 050/00708/2016

                                                     Reserved on: 21.02. 2024.
                                                   Pronounced on:10.04.2024
                                 CORAM
         HON'BLE MR. SUNIL KUMAR SINHA, MEMBER [A]
         HON'BLE MR. AJAY PRATAP SINGH, MEMBER [J]

 1. Ramashish son of Late Dwarik, Ex-Trackman under Senior Section
 Engineer (P.Way), East Central Railway, Mokama District-Patna, resident of
 village Kanhaipur via-Mokama District-Patna (Bihar).
 2. Shital son of Late Borhan, Ex-Trackman under Senior Section Engineer
 (P.Way), East Central Railway, Mokama District-Patna, resident of village
 Kanhaipur via-Mokama District-Patna (Bihar).
3. Sahdeo Son of Late Lalu, Ex Trackman Under Senior Section Engineer
(P.Way), East Central Railway, Mokama District-Patna, Resident of Village
Kanhaipur Via Mokama District-Patna (Bihar).
                                                      .......... Applicants.

                                     -Versus-
1. The Union of India through the General Manager, East Central Railway,
Hajipur, District-Vaishali, (Bihar).
2. The General Manager (Personnel), East Central Railway, Hajipur, District-
Vaishali, (Bihar).
3.The Financial Advisor & Chief Accounts Officer, East Central Railway,
Hajipur (Bihar).
4. The Divisional Railway Manager, East Central Railway, Danapur.
5. The Senior Divisional Personnel Officer, East Central Railway, Danapur.
6. The Senior Divisional Engineer (Co-Ordination), East Central Railway,
Danapur.
7. The Senior Divisional Financial Manager, East Central Railway, Danapur
                                                          ........Respondents
For Applicant:-      Shri M.P. Dixit Advocate
For Respondents:- Shri Bindhyachal Rai Additional Standing Counsel

                                      ORDER



        AS PER AJAY PRATAP SINGH, MEMBER [JUDICIAL]

1.    The present Original Application has been filed under 
Section 19
 of the
Administrative Tribunals, Act 1985 seeking direction to the respondents to
reckon 100% period of their services as casual worker after obtaining temporary
status till they are regularized on a regular/temporary post instead of 50%. So
also casual worker before obtaining the temporary status are also entitled to
                                                ::2::           OA 708/2016/CAT/PATNA BENCH


reckon 50% of casual services for purposes of pension and pensionary benefits
and revise the pension and pensionary benefits and pay arrears with interest @
15%.

                                               PRAYER

2.        The applicants have claimed following main relief(s) (as extracted from
the OA) as under:-



          "8.1 That your Lordships may graciously be pleased to command /direct the
          Respondents to count entire service of applicants rendered under Temporary status as
          full i.e. 100% instead of 50% and further be pleased to direct them to count 50% service
          of applicants rendered as Casual Labour in view of the judicial pronouncements as
          contained in Annexure A / 2 to A / 6 without any further delay.



          8.2 That the Respondents be further directed to revise the entire pensionary benefits
          accordingly and make payment of arrears with 15% interest together with all
          consequential benefit.



          8.3 Any other relief or reliefs including the cost of the proceeding may be allowed in
          favour of the Applicants."



                                             FACTS IN BRIEF


3.        Shorn of unnecessary details, the briefly stated facts, as adumbrated by
the applicants, necessary for the resolution in the lis, are as follows:-

          The applicants are three in number superannuated from the post of
Trackmen under Senior Section Engineer (Path-Way), East Central Railway,
Mokama,Danapur Division, district-Patna. The service details of the applicants
as stated in the OA as under:

 Sl.      Name of applicants.     Date           of    Date of grant of    Year           of   Date            of
 No.                              engagement     as    Temporary Status.   regularization on   Superannuation.

                                  casual worker.                           regular temporary
                                                                           post

      1                2                 3                    4                     5                  6

 1.       Ramashish               01.01.1987           01.01.1987          1992                30.04.2012
 2.       Shital                  01.01.1983           01.01.1983          1990                31.03.2005
 3.       Sahdeo                  16.11.1978           16.11.1978          1980                31.10.2005


4.        The applicants have further stated that respondents have not counted
towards qualifying service for pension and pensionary benefits rendered as casual
labour before obtaining the temporary status and the applicants are entitled for
100 % counting of service rendered after obtaining temporary status till they are
regularized on the regular post, whereas respondents reckoned only 50% of their
service as temporary status casual worker.



5.        It is also the case of the applicants that in similar facts and identical legal
issue this Tribunal in O.A. No. 505/2005, titled as Manikant Jha Versus Union
of India & ors allowed the O.A. vide order dated 02.09.2006 in O.A. No.
                                     ::3::       OA 708/2016/CAT/PATNA BENCH


505/2005. Thereafter, Hon'ble Supreme Court in Special Leave to Appeal
(Civil) No.(s) 20041/2008 titled as 
Union of India and others versus Sarju

with four connected cases vide order dated 30.09.2011 (Annexure A-3) upheld
the orders of this Tribunal and Hon'ble High Court Patna and directed to
respondents to count the full service, 100% period of service of casual worker
after obtaining temporary status till they are regularized on a regular post and
resultantly all the S.L.P. were dismissed.




6.     The applicants have also stated that this Tribunal in the batch of 29 similar
original applications with lead case O.A. No. 657/2012 allowed vide common
order dated 07.11.2014 and directed respondents to count 100% continuous
service towards pensionary benefits if otherwise admissible from the period of
temporary status till date of regularization and thereafter till date of
superannuation and to count 50% for period of continuous services rendered as
casual labour till date of obtaining temporary status with liberty to the
respondents to verify the service and other records of the employee for
ascertaining genuineness. The applicants also claiming similar benefits as
granted by this Tribunal in similar cases O.A. No. 317/2016 (Patna) Mandish
Versus Union of India & ors decided on 17.05.2016.



7.     Per contra, the respondents have contested the claim of the applicants by
filing the Written Statement that applicants have retired and all admissible
benefits paid to them. The Para 2005 of IREM-Vol.I stipulates that casual
labour on grant of temporary status and thereafter regularized by way of
absorption in the railway service on regular post than the casual labour are
entitled to count 50% service period from date of temporary status to date of
regularization on regular post for purposes of pension and other benefits. The
Para 20 of Master Circular No. 54 dated 30.09.1994 also recognizes legal right
of casual labour to count 50% period of service after attainment of temporary
status if followed by absorption in service as regular railway employee for
reckoning for pensionasry benefits. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in case of
General Manager, North West Rly & Ors Versus Chanda Devi, (2008) 2
SCC 108 also considered nature of employment of casual labour who was
granted temporary status after referring to Rule 2001, 2002 and 2005 of the
IREM and held that Rule 2005 of IREM Vol.-I has statutory force and lays
                                     ::4::       OA 708/2016/CAT/PATNA BENCH


down entitlement and privileges available to the casual labour with temporary
status.



8.        The respondents have further stated Railway Service (Pension) Rules-

1993 (for brevity hereinafter referred as Pension Rules 1993) that as per Rule
21 the engagement as period in causal labour capacity not to be treated as
qualifying services for pension etc. Thus as per Rule, Para 2005 of the IREM
Vol.-I and Para 20 of Master Circular No.54, the 50% of services of casual
service after obtaining temporary status till date of regularization and 100% of
service from date of regular posting till date of superannuation to be counted as
qualifying services for pension purpose.



9.        The respondents also submitted in the WS that Hon'ble Supreme Court in
case of 
Union of India and ors versus Rakesh Kumar
 reported in (2017)
13SCC 388 has relied on Rule 20 & 31 Note-1 of Pension Rules 1993 read with
Para 20 of Master Circular No.54 and Para 2005 of IREM-1 and upheld hence
claim of applicants is not admissible accordance with rules.




10.       The rejoinder has been filed by the applicants specifically denying the
contentions of the respondents made in the WS and stated that applicants entitled
for similar treatment and 100% service to be counted for temporary status period
instead of 50% and 50% be also reckoned for period as casual labour before
attaining temporary status. Thereafter respondents be directed to revise pension
and other benefits based on laws 
laid down in
 case of by Hon'ble Supreme Court
and same is binding precedent and earlier judgment-in-rem and judgment in case
of 
Union of India & Ors. Versus Rakesh Kumar
 (supra) in judgment in
personam hence not applicable. So also stated that Railway Board has issued
letter no. E(NG) II/2014/CL/14 dated 25.11.2014 and directed to provide for
100% of temporary status casual service rendered before absorption in regular
employment being treated as qualifying service for the purpose of grant of
pensionary benefits. The batch of cases decided by this Tribunal on 07.11.2014
upheld by Hon'ble High Court on 18.08.2015 in CWJC No. 11695 of 2015 and
no SLP preferred before the Hon'ble Supreme Court.


                                    ::5::        OA 708/2016/CAT/PATNA BENCH


           SUBMISSION ON BEHALF OF THE APPLICANTS


11.    Shri M.P. Dixit, learned counsel appearing for the applicants argued that
Hon'ble Supreme Court in similar cases from Hon'ble High Court Patna titled

Union of India & ors versus Sarju
 (supra) vide order dated 30.09.2011 upheld
the orders of this Tribunal and directed to reckon full service, 100% period of
service of temporary status till they are regularized and so applicants in present
OA superannuated between year 2005 to 2012 and entitled for similar treatment
with consequential benefits i.e. revised pension etc.


12.    Shri M.P. Dixit, learned counsel appearing for the applicants submitted
that order passed in case of 
Union of India & ors versus Sarju
 (supra) is
judgment in rem, earlier binding precedent and applicable in present case whereas
judgment in case of 
Union of India & ors versus Rakesh Kumar
 (supra) is
judgment in personam not applicable in the present case.
 
The judgment dated
30.09.2011 passed in case of 
Union of India versus Sarju
 (supra) is applicable
as on date of retirement in year 2005 to 2012, the judgement in case of 
Union of
India versus Sarju
 (supra) was applicable and in case of 
Union of India versus
Rakesh Kumar
 (supra) judgment was delivered subsequently on 24th March
2017 hence cannot be made applicable retrospectively.




13.    Shri M.P. Dixit, further canvassed that in case of the applicants, the
judgment dated 30.09.2011, passed in case of 
Union of India versus Sarju

(supra) is earlier and shall prevail being judgment in rem, whereas judgment
dated 24.03.2017 in case of 
Union of India versus Rakesh Kumar
 (supra) is
later and same shall not be applicable in the present case on hand.




14.    Shri M.P. Dixit, learned counsel for the applicants, also contended that
prior to year 2015 similarly placed employee granted reckoning benefits of 100%
period of service as temporary status casual labour for pension benefits and so
applicants cannot be discriminated based on laws 
laid down in
 case of 
Union of
India versus Rakesh Kumar
 (supra).




15.    Shri M.P. Dixit, learned counsel for the applicants, during arguments laid
much emphasis on law 
laid down by
 Hon'ble Supreme Court in case of G.L.
Batra Versus State of Haryana and others, reported in 2013 (4) PLJR (SC)


403.

                                    ::6::        OA 708/2016/CAT/PATNA BENCH


           SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS

16.    Shri Bindhyachal Rai, learned Additional Standing counsel appearing for
the respondents, in his turn would submit that all the applicants initially engaged
as the casual labour in railways, conferred with the temporary status and
thereafter absorbed on the regular post. The qualifying service for the pension
were reckoned 50% of service period after obtaining temporary status till date of
the regularization on regular post and 100% of services period reckoned after
date of regularization till date of superannuation. The qualifying service for
pension and pensionary benefits as stated hereinabove has been reckoned
accordance with Rule 20, Note-1 of Rule 31 of Pension Rules 1993 and read with
Para 20 of Master Circular No.54 and Para 1501, 2005, 2005(a) of the Indian
Railway Establishment Manual-Volume-1. (in short IREM-I)


17.    Shri Bindhyachal Rai, learned Additional Standing Counsel for the
respondents vociferously canvassed that all the applicants have been correctly as
per pension rules granted service benefits by reckoning 50% of service period
after obtaining temporary status casual labour and 100% after date of regular
appointment till date of superannuation and the applicants do not have any vested
legal right and no any legal right accrued in their favour to claim 100% of
service period to be reckoned for temporary status period. The claim is contrary
to statutory Pension Rules 1993.



18.    Shri Bindhyachal Rai, learned Additional Standing Counsel also
contended that Hon'ble Supreme Court in case of 
Union of India & Ors. Versus
Sarju
 (supra) given direction on special facts and same is judgment in personam,
whereas in case of 
Union of India & Ors. Versus Rakesh Kumar
 (supra) later
decision has laid down point of law in elaborate manner after considering all
relevant provisions applicable to applicants at the time of retirement for grant of
pension.




19.    Shri Bindhyachal Rai, learned Additional Standing Counsel appearing for
the respondents to buttress his submissions heavily placed reliance on judgments
dated, 24.07.2017 in CWJC No.5111 of 2017, The Union of India & ors versus
Binod Singh and Judgment dated 21.12.2017 in CWJC No. 12459 of 2017
titled the 
Union of India and others versus Ramjee and others
 passed by
Hon'ble High Court, Patna modified orders of this Tribunal in similar cases and
followed very recent decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court in case of Union of
                                    ::7::        
OA 708/2016/CAT/PATNA BENCH


India and others versus Rakesh Kumar
 reported in (2017) 13 SCC 338: 2017
(3) PLJR SC 83.




20.    Shri Bindhyachal Rai, learned Additional Standing Counsel also
emphasized that Hon'ble High Court of Judicature at Patna has followed law laid
down on the point of law by Hon'ble Supreme Court in recent case of 
Union of
India & Ors. Versus Rakesh Kumar
 (supra) and the said decisions of the
Hon'ble High Court at Patna are binding precedents on this Tribunal and
applicants are entitled to reckon only 50% of service of temporary status till date
of regularization for qualifying service and do not have any vested right to claim
100% service period to be counted for temporary status period.




21.    We have bestowed our anxious considerations on the rival contentions of
the learned counsel appearing for the parties and perused the material placed on
record.



22.    The admitted facts are that all the applicants were engaged as causal
labourers in railways before year 1987, granted temporary status and regularized
on regular post of Trackman. The respondents have counted only 50% of the
service period after obtaining temporary status casual labour till date of
regularization/absorption against the regular post and reckoned 100% of period
of service from date of regularization till date of superannuation for purposes of
qualifying service towards grant of pension and pensionary benefits. So also the
respondents not counted half period of casual service in railways before attaining
temporary status as qualifying service for pensionary benefits. Admittedly in
identical cases Union of India & Ors. Versus Binod Singh in CWJC No.
5111/2017 decided on 24.07.2017 and Union of India & Ors. Versus Ramjee
& Ors. decided on 21.12.2017. Hon'ble High Court of Patna has followed the
recent judgment in case of 
Union of India & Ors. Versus Rakesh Kumar

(supra).




23.    The dispute in the present case is that applicants are claiming reckoning
towards qualifying service for pension and pensionary benefits 50% of the casual
labour period before obtaining temporary status and 100% counting of service
rendered after obtaining temporary status casual labour till date of regularization
instead of 50% of their temporary status service period already counted by the
respondents for pensionary benefits. The claim of the applicants is based on
                                          ::8::          OA 708/2016/CAT/PATNA BENCH


similar treatment to count 100% of service for temporary status period based on
laws 
laid down in
 case of 
Union of India & Ors. Versus Sarju
 (supra).
 
Whereas
Hon'ble High Court of Patna has followed the recent decisions of Hon'ble
Supreme Court in case of 
Union of India & Ors. Versus Rakesh Kumar
 (supra)
harmonizing conflicting judgments to bring about uniformity in relation to grant
of benefits of pension for casual                temporary status employees in railway
subsequently regularized/absorbed on regular post.


                                         THE ISSUE

24.    From the above submissions of the learned counsel for the parties and
material on record, the issues which arise for consideration in the present O.A.
are-



       1. Whether the casual workers before obtaining the temporary
       status is also entitled to reckon 50% of casual services for the
       purpose of pensionary benefits?



       2. Whether the entire service of a casual worker in railway
       after obtaining temporary status till their regular absorption
       on a post is entitled to be reckoned for pensionary benefit or
       only 50% period of such service can be reckoned for
       pensionary benefits ?

                           THE RELEVANT RULES


25.       The Rules which are relevant to decide both the issues are extracted as
under:-



(i)    The Railway Services (Pension) Rules, 1993 (in short Pension Rules 1993) have been
       framed under proviso to 
Article 309
 of the Constitution of India. The Rules which are
       relevant to decide the issue, are extracted for ready reference as below:-

       Rule 6. Regulation of claims to pension or family pension. - (1) Any claim to pension
       or family pension shall be regulated by the provisions of these rules in force at the time
       when a railway servant retires or is retired or is discharged or is allowed to resign from
       service or dies, as the case may be.

        (2) The day on which a railway servant retires or is retired or is discharged or is
       allowed to resign from service or dies as the case may be, shall be treated as his last
       working day."

        Rule 20. Commencement of qualifying service- Subject to the provisions of these
       rules, qualifying service of a railway servant shall commence from the date he takes
       charge of the post to which he is first appointed either substantively or in an officiating
       or temporary capacity:

        Provided that officiating or temporary service is followed, without interruption, by
       substantive appointment in the same or another service or post:

                Provided further that-

                (a) in the case of a railway servant in a Group 'D' service or post who held a
               lien or a suspended lien on a permanent pensionable post prior to the 17th
                                          ::9::          OA 708/2016/CAT/PATNA BENCH


                April, 1950, service rendered before attaining the age of sixteen years shall not
                count for any purpose; and

                (b) in the case of a railway servant not covered by clause (a), service rendered
                before attaining the age of eighteen years shall not count, except for
                compensation gratuity (Authority: Railway Board's letter No. F(E)/99/PN
                (Modification) dated 23.5.2000)

                 (c) the provisions of clause (b) shall not be applicable in the cases of counting
                of military service for civil pension under rule 34. (Authority: Railway Board's
                letter No. F(E)11/2004/PN1/21(Amendment) dated 7.12.2004)

(ii)                     Rule 31 "Counting of service paid from Contingencies- In
               respect of a railway servant, in service on or after the 22nd day of
               August, 1968, half the service paid from contingencies shall be taken
               into account for calculating pensionary benefits on absorption in
               regular employment, subject to the following condition namely: -

                         the service paid from contingencies has been in a job involving
               wholetime employment;

                          the service paid from contingencies should be in a type of work
               or job for which regular posts could have been sanctioned such as posts
               of malis, chowkidars and khalasis;

                           the service should have been such for which payment has
               been made either on monthly rate basis or on daily rates computed and
               paid on a monthly basis and which, though not analogous to the
               regular scales of pay, borne some relation in the matter of pay to those
               being paid for similar jobs being performed at the relevant period by
               staff in regular establishments;

                         (b)      the service paid from contingencies has been
               continuous and followed by absorption in regular employment without
               a break;

                         Provided that the weightage for past service paid from
               contingencies shall be limited to the period after 1st January, 1961
               subject to the condition that authentic records of service such as pay
               bill, leave record or service-book is available.

                         NOTE - (1) the provisions of this rule shall also apply to
               casual labour paid from contingencies.

                         (2) The expression "absorption in regular employment" means
               absorption against a regular post."

(iii)   Para 20 of the Master Circular No. 54 is quoted as below:-

                "20. Counting of the period of service of Casual Labour for pensionary
               benefits: - Half of the period of service of casual labour (other than casual
               labour employed on Projects) after attainment of temporary status on
               completion of 120 days continuous service if it is followed by absorption in
               service as regular railway employee, counts for pensionary benefits. With effect
               from 1-1-1981, the benefit has also been extended to Project Casual Labour."

(iv)    The Para 2005 of IREM-Vol-I reads as-

               The Next Provision need to be noted is Para 2005 of IREM, which is as
               follows:-



                 2005. Entitlements and privileges admissible to Casual Labour who
                are treated as temporary (i.e. given temporary status) after the
                completion of 120 day or 360 days of continuous employment (as the
                case may be).

                 (a) Casual labour treated as temporary are entitled to the rights and
                benefits admissible to temporary railway servants as 
laid down in

                Chapter XXIII of this Manual. The rights and privileges admissible
                to such labour also include the benefit of D & A rules. However, their
                service prior to absorption in temporary/ permanent/ regular cadre
                after the required selection/ screening will not count for the purpose
                of seniority vis-a-vis other regular/ temporary employees. This is
                however, subject to the provisions that if the seniority of certain
                                        ::10::          OA 708/2016/CAT/PATNA BENCH


               individual employees has already been determined in any other
               manner, either in pursuance of judicial decisions of otherwise, the
               seniority so determined shall not be altered.

                          Casual labour including Project casual labour shall be
               eligible to count only half the period of service rendered by them after
               attaining temporary status on completion of prescribed days of
               continuous employment and before regular absorption, as qualifying
               service for the purpose of pensionary benefits. This benefit will be
               admissible only after their absorption in regular employment. Such
               casual labour, who have attained temporary status, will also be
               entitled to carry forward the leave at their credit to new post on
               absorption in regular service. Daily rated casual labour will not be
               entitled to these benefits.

       (iv) 1501 of Chapter-XV of IREM-I (i) Temporary Railway Servants
               Definition--A "temporary railway servant" means a railway servant without a
               lien on a permanent post on a Railway or any other administration or office
               under the Railway Board. The term does not include "casual labour",
               including 'casual labour with temporary status', a "contract" or "part-time"

               employee or an "apprentice".

      (v)      24.       So far as reckoning period of service in case of railway employees for
               pensionary benefits. The issue is no more res-integra. The Hon'ble Supreme
               Court in case of Union of India Versus Rakesh Kumar, reported in 2017
               (13) SCC 388: AIR 2017 Supreme Court 1691 was seisin with only issue
               "whether the entire service of a casual worker after obtaining temporary status
               till his regular absorption on a post is entitled to be reckoned for pensionary
               benefit or only 50 percent period of such service can be reckoned for
               pensionary benefit?" 
In case of 
Rakesh Kumar
 (supra) the respondents-
               employees from railway were initially appointed as casual labor in Northern
               Railway after working and were granted temporary status and subsequently
               regularized against posts. The Hon'ble Supreme Court examined scheme of
               Rules, 1993, Para 2005 of IREM. The Hon'ble Apex Court in Para 55 held that
               casual worker after obtaining temporary status is entitled to reckon 50% of his
               services till he is regularized on a regular/temporary post for purpose of
               calculation of pension. So also casual worker before obtaining the temporary
               status is also entitled to reckon 50% of casual service for purposes of pension.


                                                                          [Emphasis supplied]
                               ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

26.   We have extracted herein above the relevant rules framed under the
proviso to the 
Article 309
 of the Constitution of India. The applicants were
initially engaged as causal labour in railway prior to1987, granted temporary
status and regularized on the regular post of Trackmen under Senior S.E. (P-
Way), ECR, Mokama and superannuated on 30.04.2012, 31.03.2005 and
31.03.2005 respectively.



27.   We are of the view that right to pension accrued in favour of the applicants
on superannuation in accordance with the statutory Pension Rules 1993 and, the
Railway Board Circulars having statutory force extracted herein above sub-
servient to Pension Rules 1993. The applicants have vested legal right to count
period of qualifying service and same has accrued accordance with statutory
rules. We are examining the relevant rules to resolve the controversy related to
                                       ::11::         OA 708/2016/CAT/PATNA BENCH


reckoning period of service to be counted as qualifying for the purposes of
calculation of pension for the applicants in the case on hand.



28.    Rule 20 of Pension Rules 1993 stipulates that qualifying service shall
commence from the date the employees takes charge of the post to which he is
initially appointed either substantively or in an officiating or temporary capacity.
Rule 20 of Pension Rules 1993 in clear as noon day that same is applicable when
an employee is appointed against the post in substantive capacity or in an
officiating or temporary capacity. It is also clear from the plain reading of Rule
20 that it is attracted only when employee is appointed against any post. The
proviso to Rule 20 reads as "Provided that officiating or temporary service is
followed, without interruption, by substantive appointment in the same or
another service or post." The plain reading of the proviso appended to Rule 20
on Pension Rules 1993 makes it clear to count commencement of qualifying
service from the date of employee takes charge of the post for qualifying service
to be reckoned, the employee must be appointed on the regular post and not
otherwise. The combined reading of the first proviso to Rule 20 and Rule 20 of
Pension Rules 1993 make it abundantly clear that merely grant of temporary
status to casual labours employees will not be entitled to count their services of
temporary status for pensionary purposes but employee also to be appointed on
the regular post/absorbed on regularization, than only the railway employees
entitled to count their services of date of taking charge and condition precedent
to be regularized on same or any regular post than for qualifying service will be
counted from date of taking charge.



29.    The Hon'ble Supreme Court in case of 
General Manager, North West
Railway and others versus Chanda Devi
, reported in (2008) 2 SCC 108 in
paragraph no. 29 observed as under:-




               "29. In absence of any statutory rules framed, executive instructions can be
              issued in relation to the matter governed by the constitutional provisions.
              In Khem Chand [AIR 1958 SC 300] this Court had noticed the relevant
              constitutional provisions and opined that the Railway Manual was an amalgam
              of various circulars issued from time to time. Such executive instructions or
              rules framed would be statutory in nature."



30.    Rule 31 of Pension Rule 1993 prescribes for counting of service paid from
contingencies in respect of a railway servant in service on or after 22.08.1968,
half the service paid from contingencies shall be taken into account for
                                    ::12::        OA 708/2016/CAT/PATNA BENCH


calculating pensionary benefits on absorption in regular employment. The Note-
I of Rule 31 of Pension Rules 1993 specifically expressly provided intention to
count half of the services rendered as casual labour before obtaining the status
of temporary casual labour. We can safely conclude that all the applicants have
vested legal right accrued at the time of superannuation to reckon 50% of service
period as casual labour before obtaining temporary status.



31.    The issue no.1 so far relates to reckoning of 50% casual period before
obtaining the temporary status for purposes of pension to be in accordance with
Note 1 of Rule 31 of Pension Rules 1993 and we hold that applicants are entitled
to count for 50% casual period before attaining temporary status and said benefits
has been illegally denied and has not been extended to these applicants.



32.    We have considered the matter and already analyzed in detail related to
the issue no. 1 related to reckoning 50% casual service before obtaining
temporary status for purpose of qualifying service for grant of pension in light of
Note 1 of Rule 31 of Pension Rules 1993. Accordingly we decide the issue no.1
in favour of the applicants and applicants are entitled to reckon 50% of their
services as casual labour before obtaining the temporary status for the purpose of
re-calculation of retiral benefits payable to the applicants and respondents are
directed to verify and extend benefits of said 50% services of casual period, if
already not have been extended to the applicants.



33.    Now coming as to the next issue, issue no.2, "whether entire, 100%
service of a casual worker in railway after obtaining temporary status till their
regular absorption on a post entitled to reckon for pensionary benefits or only
50% period of such service can be reckoned accordance with rules?"



34.    We have already extracted relevant rules to resolve the controversy. Rule
20 of the Pension Rules, 1993 provides to count qualifying service for pension
purpose from the date these applicants appointed in temporary capacity with
condition precedent that employee should be absorbed on substantive
appointment and there should be no interruption in the services. Further the sub-
para (a) of Para 2005 of IREM-Vol. I, recognizes to count half of the services
rendered as temporary status casual labour before regular absorption. Thus
before being regularized as per sub-para (a) of para 2005 of IREM-Vol. I,
applicants are entitled to reckon 50% of service period as temporary status.

                                       ::13::         OA 708/2016/CAT/PATNA BENCH


Thereafter as per Rule 20 of Pension Rules, 1931 once these applicants acquired
status of temporary railway employee as defined in para 1501 of the IREM-Vol.
I, thereafter on regularization on regular post of Trackmen, the vested legal right
accrues for counting of 100% service till date of superannuation. So far as
service period from date of attaining temporary status casual labour till regular
absorption on substantive appointment as per rules i.e. Para 1501 of IREM,
applicants held status of purely temporary casual labour and they were not
temporary railway employee so only entitled for reckoning 50% of service
rendered after obtaining temporary status casual labour. Thus no legal right
accrued in favour of applicants of this O.A. as on date of superannuation
accordance with statutory rules for railway employees to reckon 100% of service
rendered after obtaining temporary status till date of regularization as their
status till date of regularization as their status in railways was of temporary
casual labour and not of temporary railway employees. The next provision to be
noted is Para 2005 of IREM-I also provides for same scheme for counting the
period for pensionary benefits. The sub-para (a) of Para 2005 of IREM-I
provides-



              " 2005(a)........Casual labour including project labour shall be eligible to
              count only half the period of service rendered by them after attaining
              temporary status on completion of prescribed days of continuous employment
              and before regular absorption as qualifying service for the purpose of
              poensionary benefits."

                                                                 [Emphasis supplied]
       The Para 20 of Master Circular No. 54 for ready reference reiterated as:-

              "20. Counting of the period of service of Casual Labour for pensionary
              benefits: - Half of the period of service of casual labour (other than casual
              labour employed on Projects) after attainment of temporary status on
              completion of 120 days continuous service if it is followed by absorption in
              service as regular railway employee, counts for pensionary benefits. With
              effect from 1-1-1981, the benefit has also been extended to Project Casual
              Labour."

                                                                       [Emphasis supplied]


35.    The perusal of Para 20 of the Master Circular No. 54 already extracted
hereinabove indicates that only half of the period of service of a casual labour
after attainment of temporary status if it is followed by absorption in service as a
regular railway employees, counts for pensionary benefits.



36.    We have analysed entire relevant rules applicable to carve out legal
entitlement of applicants so far relates to issue no.2 and we are of the view that
the applicants are entitled to reckon 50% of his services after obtaining temporary
                                    ::14::       OA 708/2016/CAT/PATNA BENCH


status till they were regularized on a regular/temporary post of Trackmen for the
purpose of calculation of pension and pensionary benefits in the light of Rule 20,
31 of Pension Rules read with Para 20 of the Master Circular No.54 and Para
2005 and sub-para (a) of Para 2005 of IREM-I. Accordingly, we decide the issue
no.2, against all the applicants and we hold that no vested right accrued in the
favour of the applicants to reckon 100% of casual worker service period after
obtaining temporary status till all of them were regularized on a regular post of
Trackmen instead applicants have been correctly granted as per rules benefits of
reckoning period 50%of their services after obtaining temporary status till they
are regularized. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in recent decision in case of 
Union
of India & Ors. Versus Rakesh Kumar
 (supra) in identical facts and legal
issues after taking into consideration conflicting judgments has explained and
harmonised to bring uniformity on the issues involved in this case on hand. The
Hon'ble High Court of Patna, their Lordships have followed the recent
judgment of Hon'ble Apex Court and we are bound by judgments of our own
Hon'ble High Court of the State.




37.    Now reversing back to the gist of the contentions of Mr. M.P. Dixit,
learned counsel for the applicants, criticizing the inaction of respondents not
counting 100% of period of service of casual worker after obtaining temporary
status till date of regularization instead respondents reckoned 50% of temporary
status casual labour services for the pension. The claim of applicants based on
order dated 30.09.2011 passed by Hon'ble Supreme Court in case of 
Union of
India & ors versus Sarju
 (supra) and on similar lines orders passed by this
Tribunal.




38.    Shri Bindhyachal Rai, learned Additional Standing Counsel appearing for
all the respondents would submit that applicants have been correctly granted
benefits of counting 50% of services period of temporary status for pensionary
benefits accordance with statutory rules and they have no vested legal right, no
legal right accrued. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in recent judgment of 
Union of
India & Ors. Versus Rakesh Kumar
 (supra) has considered the conflicting
judgments and scheme of statutory rules for casual worker, temporary status
working in railways.
 
The Hon'ble High Court Patna, their Lordships followed
the ratio of judgment in recent case of 
Union of India & Ors. Versus Rakesh
Kumar
 (supra) passed by Hon'ble Supreme court. Shri Bindhyachal Rai
                                          ::15::          OA 708/2016/CAT/PATNA BENCH


vociferously canvassed that applicants are entitled for 50% of service period after
obtaining temporary status and the relevant rules not permit to extend benefits to
count 100% service as temporary status casual worker before date of
regularization.




39.     Much emphasis has been placed by Mr. M.P. Dixit, learned counsel for
the applicants on order dated 30.09.2021 passed in case of 
Union of India & ors
versus Sarju
 (supra) passed by Hon'ble Supreme Court directing in similar matte
of counting of past services of temporary status period to extent of 100% till date
of regularization. Per contra, Shri Bindhyachal Rai learned ASC placed heavy
reliance on the binding precedent, judgment in rem having bending force under

Article 141
 of the Constitution of India.
 
Shri Rai further submitted that order
passed in case of 
Union of India & Ors. Versus Sarju
 (supra) was based on
special facts and elaborate one the scheme, legal point the judgment in latest case

Union of India & Ors. Versus Rakesh Kumar
 (supra) is followed by Hon'ble
High Court Patna of the state binding on this Tribunal to follow and same cannot
be bypassed by this Tribunal.




40.     Before into the contentions of the parties, we think it appropriate to refer
to the entire order dated 30.09.2011 in case of 
Union of India & Ors. Versus
Sarju
 (supra) so also relevant paragraphs of judgment dated 24th March, 2017 in
case of 
Union of India & Ors. Versus Rakesh Kumar
 (supra) and followed by
their Lordships of our own Hon'ble High Court, Patna, for ready reference
reproduced as-




 
Order dated 30.09.2011 in case of Judgment dated 24th March, 2017 in case
 
Union of India & Ors. Versus Sarju of Union of India & Ors. Versus Rakesh

 (supra)                                          
Kumar
 (supra). The relevant para 22 to 56
                                                  reads as-


          Delay condoned.                        The relevant portion of judgment of Rakesh Kumar
          Four of the above noted five special (supra) is reproduced for ready reference as under:-

 leave petitions are directed against the          22. From the above submissions of the learned
 orders passed by the different Division           counsel for the parties and materials on record, the
 Benches of the Patna High Court dismissing        only issue which arises for consideration in these
 the writ petitions filed by the petitioners       appeals is:

 against the directions given by the Central       Whether the entire services of a casual
 Administrative Tribunal, Patna Bench (for         worker after obtaining temporary status
 short, 'the Tribunal') for counting the service   till his regular absorption on a post is
 of the respondents with effect from the date      entitled to be reckoned for pensionary
 they were given temporary status till the date    benefit or only 50 per cent period of such
 of superannuation for the purpose of              service can be reckoned for pensionary
 calculation of pension and other retiral          benefit?

                                           ::16::        OA 708/2016/CAT/PATNA BENCH


benefits. SLP(C) No.35934 of 2009 is                23. In so far as reckoning of 50 per cent casual
directed against the order of the High Court       period, there is no challenge and it is clear that the
which upheld the direction given by the            said reckoning is in accordance with Rule 31 of
Tribunal for counting of casual and                Rules, 1993 and the benefit of said 50 per cent
temporary service for the purpose of payment       services of casual period had already been
of retiral benefits.                               extended to the respondents. Thus, we need to
         Sarju (respondent in SLP(C) No.           answer in these appeals the only question as noted
20041/2008) was engaged as casual labour           above.

on 17.1.1960. He was given temporary status         25. Para 20 of the Master Circular No. 54 is
with effect from 1.1.1981 and regularised          quoted as below:-
with effect from 1.4.1988. On attaining the        "20. Counting of the period of service of
age of superannuation, he was retired from         Casual Labour for pensionary benefits: -
service on 30.11.2001. The application filed       Half of the period of service of casual
by him under 
Section 19
 of the                     labour (other than casual labour

Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985
 (for            employed on Projects) after attainment of
short, 'the Act') for counting his temporary       temporary status on completion of 120
service as part of qualifying service for the      days continuous service if it is followed by
purpose of calculation of the retiral benefits     absorption in service as regular railway
was disposed of by the Tribunal vide order         employee, counts for pensionary benefits.


dated 1.3.2006, the operative portion of           With effect from 1-1-1981, the benefit has
which reads as under:                              also been extended to Project Casual
         "In view of the law 
laid down by
 the      Labour."


         Hon'ble Andhra Pradesh High               26. Next Provision need to be noted is Para 2005
         Court as well as C.A.T., Cuttack          of IREM, which is as follows:-

         Bench, there is no basis/ground to                       "2005 IREM:

 
take different view. In the result, the    2005. Entitlements and privileges
         O.A. is allowed. The respondents are      admissible to Casual Labour who are
         directed to recalculate the pension       treated as temporary (i.e. given
         with arrears from due date (the date      temporary status) after the completion of
         of superannuation) with all               120 day or 360 days of continuous
         incidental benefits after counting the    employment (as the case may be).
         full service from the date of grant of     (a) Casual labour treated as temporary
         temporary status i.e. 1.4.1981. These     are entitled to the rights and benefits
         exercises should be completed within      admissible to temporary railway servants
         a period of four months from the date     as 
laid down in
 Chapter XXIII of this
         of receipt of a copy of this order.       Manual. The rights and privileges
         There shall be no order as to cost."      admissible to such labour also include
         Ishwar Nand Mishra (respondent in         the benefit of D & A rules. However, their
SLP(C) No. 13709/2009) was engaged as              service prior to absorption in temporary/
casual labour in 1966. He was granted              permanent/ regular cadre after the
temporary status with effect from 10.3.1971        required selection/ screening will not
and was regularised with effect from               count for the purpose of seniority vis-a-
27.5.1981. After attaining the age of              vis other regular/ temporary employees.


superannuation, he filed an application for        This is however, subject to the provisions
counting his past service for the purpose of       that if the seniority of certain individual
pension etc., which was disposed of by the         employees has already been determined
Tribunal vide order dated 16.1.2008, the           in any other manner, either in pursuance
operative portion of which reads as under:         of judicial decisions of otherwise, the
         "In view of the law 
laid down by
 the      seniority so determined shall not be
         Hon'ble Andhra Pradesh High               altered.


         Court as well as CAT, Cuttack                       Casual labour including Project
         Bench, and Patna bench there is no        casual labour shall be eligible to count
         basis/grounds to take a different the     only half the period of service rendered
         pension with arrears from due date        by them after attaining temporary status
         (the date of superannuation) with all     on completion of prescribed days of
         incidental benefits after counting the    continuous employment and before
         full service from the date of grant of    regular absorption, as qualifying service
         temporary status i.e. 15.3.1971. The      for the purpose of pensionary benefits.
         exercise should 4 be completed            This benefit will be admissible only after
         within a period of four months from       their absorption in regular employment.

         the date of the receipt of a copy of      Such casual labour, who have attained
         this order, No order as to the costs."    temporary status, will also be entitled to
                                           ::17::        OA 708/2016/CAT/PATNA BENCH


         Mani Kant Jha (respondent in              carry forward the leave at their credit to
SLP(C) No. 35934/2009) joined service as           new post on absorption in regular service.
casual labour on 30.7.1973. He was granted         Daily rated casual labour will not be
temporary status with effect from 1.1.1981         entitled to these benefits.

and was absorbed on regular basis with             27. Railway Services (Pension) Rules, 1993 have
effect from 1.4.1988. After attaining the age      been framed under proviso to 
Article 309
 of the
of superannuation with effect from                 Constitution of India. Rule 20 and Rule 31 of
30.6.2005, the respondent filed O.A. No.           Rules, 1993 which are relevant for our purpose,
505/2005 for issue of a direction to the           are extracted as below: -

petitioners herein to count his past service as             "20.      Commencement           of
part of qualifying service for the purpose of      qualifying service- Subject to the
calculation of retiral benefits. The same was      provisions of these rules, qualifying
disposed of by the Tribunal vide order dated       service of a railway servant shall
29.11.2006, the operative portion of which         commence from the date he takes charge
reads as under:                                    of the post to which he is first appointed
         "In the result, this application is       either substantively or in an officiating or
         allowed. The respondent No.2 and 3,       temporary capacity:

         namely the Chief Administrative                    Provided that officiating or
         Officer [Con] E.C. Railway,               temporary service is followed, without
         Mahendrughat, Patna and the Chief         interruption, by substantive appointment
         Personnel Officer, E.C. Railway,          in the same or another service or post:
         Hazipur, are hereby directed to get                Provided further that -
         the qualifying period of service of the            (a) in the case of a railway
         applicant, for the purposes of            servant in a Group 'D' service or post who
         pensionary benefits, calculated           held a lien or a suspended lien on a
         afresh adding thereto the entire          permanent pensionable post prior to the
         period of service undergone by the        17th April, 1950, service rendered before
         applicant under temporary status          attaining the age of sixteen years shall not
         and half period of service undergone      count for any purpose; and
         as casual labourer and then to have                (b) in the case of a railway
         the pensionary benefits calculated        servant not covered by clause (a), service
         thereupon afresh. This should be          rendered before attaining the age of
         done within three months of the           eighteen years shall not count, except for
         receipt of a copy of this order           compensation gratuity."
         whereafter the arrears of retiral
         benefits including of the pension,                 "31. Counting of service paid
         should be paid within one month,          from Contingencies- In respect of a
         eligible failing which the amount of      railway servant, in service on or after the
         unpaid arrears would be payable           22nd day of August, 1968, half the service
         with interest @9% per annum               paid from contingencies shall be taken
         starting from the date of expiry 5 of     into account for calculating pensionary
         the period of four months after           benefits on absorption in regular
         receipt of a copy of order, till the      employment, subject to the following
         amount is paid."                          condition namely: -

         Chanarik and 4 others (respondents                 the     service      paid      from
in SLP(C) No. 35936/2009) were initially           contingencies has been in a job involving
engaged as 
CPC
/Gangmen. They were given            wholetime employment;
temporary status with effect from                            the    service      paid      from
26.12.1985, 25.1.1986 and 14.2.1986                contingencies should be in a type of work
respectively. After superannuation from the        or job for which regular posts could have
service, they filed O.A. No. 260/2005 for          been sanctioned such as posts of malis,
issue of a direction to the petitioners herein     chowkidars and khalasis;

to count their total service as part of                       the service should have been
qualifying service for the purpose of payment      such for which payment has been made
of retiral dues. The same was disposed of by       either on monthly rate basis or on daily
the Tribunal vide order dated 2.9.2005, the        rates computed and paid on a monthly
operative of which reads as under:                 basis and which, though not analogous to
         "In the result, this OA is allowed.       the regular scales of pay, borne some
         The respondents are directed to           relation in the matter of pay to those being
         grant pension with arrears from due       paid for similar jobs being performed at
         date (date of superannuation), with       the relevant period by staff in regular
         all incidental benefits, after counting   establishments;

                                           ::18::        OA 708/2016/CAT/PATNA BENCH


         the full service from the date of grant            (b) the service paid from
         of temporary status i.e. 26.12.1985,      contingencies has been continuous and
         25.1.1986, 26.12.1985, 14.2.1986          followed by absorption in regular
         and 26.12.1985 respectively."             employment without a break;
         Ram Barai (respondent in SLP(C)                    Provided that the weightage for
No. 14690/2010) was initially engaged as           past service paid from contingencies shall
Casual Labour/Gangman on 17.4.1967. He             be limited to the period after 1st January,
was granted temporary status with effect           1961 subject to the condition that
from 11.11.1990 and was regularised with           authentic records of service such as pay
effect from 18.9.1995. After superannuation        bill, leave record or service-book is
from service, he filed O.A. No. 97/2006 for        available.
counting his total service for the purpose of               NOTE - (1) the provisions of this
retiral benefits. The same was disposed of by      rule shall also apply to casual labour paid
the Tribunal vide order dated 31.8.2007, the       from contingencies.
relevant portion of which reads as under:                   (2) The expression "absorption in
         "I have considered the rival view         regular employment" means absorption
         points carefully. In view of the          against a regular post."

         judicial pronouncements of Hon'ble        28. The perusal of para 20 of the Master
         Andhra Pradesh High Court and the         Circular indicates that only half of the period of
         Divisional Bench of Central               service of a casual labour after attainment of
         Administrative Tribunal as well as        temporary status on completion of 120 days
         or single Bench of Central                continuous service if it is followed by absorption in
         Administrative Tribunal, I agree that     service as a regular Railway employee, counts for
         the applicant is entitled to get          pensionary benefits.
         pension treating the entire period of     29. Para 2005 of Indian Railway Establishment
         service of temporary status as            Manual also contains the same scheme for
         pensionable and the period of             reckoning the period for pensionary benefit. Para
         service rendered as cast labour as 50     2005 contains the heading:

         per      cent     pensionable.     The    "2005. Entitlements and Privileges
         respondent are directed to give these     admissible to Casual Labour who are
         benefits as and when the applicant        treated as temporary (i.e. given temporary
         retires."                                 status) after the completion of 120 days or
         The writ petitions filed by the           360 days of continuous employment (as
petitioners questioning the legality and           the case may be)."
correctness of the orders passed by the            30. The above heading enumerates the privileges
Tribunal were dismissed by the High Court.         admissible to casual labour who are treated as
         We have heard learned counsel for         temporary. Clause(a) of para 2005 provides: "

the parties and perused the record. We have                 Casual labour including Project
also gone through the judgment of this Court       casual labour shall be eligible to count
in Union of India and others vs.                   only half the period of service rendered by
K.G.Radhakrishnan Panickar and others              them after attaining temporary status on
[(1998) 5 SCC 111]. In our view, the               completion of prescribed days of
directions given by the Tribunal in the matter     continuous employment and before
of counting of past service of the respondents     regular absorption, as qualifying service
for the purpose of calculation of the retiral      for the purpose of pensionary benefits."

benefits did not suffer from any legal             35. The Judgment of this Court in Chanda
infirmity and the High Court rightly declined      
Devi
's case(Supra) considered the nature of
to interfere with the same.
 
The judgment of        employment of casual labour who was granted
this Court in 
Union of India vs. K.G.
              temporary status.
 In 
the above case
, Smt. Santosh,
Radhakrishnan Panickar (supra) on which            the respondent was widow of Sh. Ram Niwas who
reliance has been placed by learned counsel        was a project casual labour. Under the scheme
for the petitioners is clearly distinguishable.    
framed by Union of India in pursuance of order of
In that 7 case, the Court was called upon to       this court in 
Inderpal Yadav Vs. Union of India
,
consider whether the services rendered by          1985 (2) SCC 648, Ram Niwas was treated as
the employees as Project Casual Labour can         temporary employee w.e.f 01.01.1986. After the
be treated as part of the qualifying service for   death of Ram Niwas, her widow filed the claim for
the purpose of calculation of the retiral          grant of family pension which was rejected by the
benefits and whether the cut off date fixed in     Railway against which the widow approach the
the policy framed by the Railway                   Central Administration Tribunal. The Tribunal
Administration for counting half of the            allowed the claim, Writ Petition filed by Union of
service rendered as Project Casual Labour          India was dismissed by the Rajasthan High Court
was discriminatory and violative of Article        against which the appeal was filed. After referring
                                          ::19::        OA 708/2016/CAT/PATNA BENCH


14 of the Constitution. After adverting to the    to Rule 2001, Rule2002 and Rule 2005 of IREM,
relevant policy decisions, this Court held that   this Court held that Rule 2005 clearly lays down
the policy of the Railways does not suffer        the entitlement and privileges admissible to casual
from any constitutional infirmity. That           labour who are treated as temporary i.e. given
judgment has no bearing on the decision of        temporary status.
the issue whether temporary service, which        36. This 
Court further held
 that there is a
was followed by regularisation should be          distinction between the casual labour having a
counted as part of the qualifying service for     temporary status and temporary servant, para 24
the purpose of retiral benefits. As a matter of   of the judgment is relevant which is quoted as
fact, if the respondents had prayed for           below:


counting half of the service rendered by them              "24. The contrast between a
as Project Casual Labour as part of               casual labour having a temporary status
qualifying service, we may have examined          and a temporary servant may immediately
the issue in detail and decided whether the       be noticed from the definition of a
said prayer should be granted. However as         temporary railway servant contained in
they did not challenge the orders of the          Rule 1501 occurring in Chapter XV of the
Tribunal before the High Court, we refrain        Manual:

from expressing any opinion on the issue.                  "1501.(i) Temporary railway
         The special leave petitions are          servants
accordingly dismissed. The petitioners are                 Definition- A 'temporary railway
directed to calculate the pension and other       servant' means a railway servant without
retiral benefits payable to the respondents       a lien on a permanent post on a railway or
keeping in view the directions given by the       any other administration or office under
Tribunal and pay the arrears within next          the Railway Board. The term does not
three months with interest at the rate of 12%     include 'casual labour', including 'casual
from the dates of their retirement on             labour' with temporary status', a 'contract'
attaining the age of superannuation.              or 'part time' employee or an
         A report showing compliance of this      'apprentice'."

order shall be filed in the Registry of this      39. Much reliance has been placed by learned
Court within four months and the matter be        counsel for the respondent as well as Delhi High
posted before the Court in the 3rd week of        Court on rule 20. Rule 20 provides:
February, 2012.                                            20...Subject to the provisions of
                                                  these rules, qualifying service of a railway
                                                  servant shall commence from the date he
                                                  takes charge of the post to which he is first
                                                  appointed either substantively or in an
                                                  officiating or temporary capacity:

                                                           Provided that officiating or
                                                  temporary service is followed, without
                                                  interruption, by substantive appointment
                                                  in the same or another service or post..."

                                                  40. Rule 20 provides that qualifying service shall
                                                  commence from the date the employee takes
                                                  charge of the post to which he is first appointed
                                                  either substantively or in an officiating or
                                                  temporary capacity. Rule 20 is attracted when a
                                                  person is appointed to the post in any of the above
                                                  capacities. Rule 20 has no application when
                                                  appointment is not against any post. When a casual
                                                  labour is granted a temporary status, grant of a
                                                  status confers various privileges as enumerated in
                                                  para 2005 of IREM. One of the benefits
                                                  enumerated in para 2005 sub clause(a) is also to
                                                  make him eligible to count only half of the services
                                                  rendered by him after attaining temporary status.

                                                  Rule 20 is thus clearly not attracted in a case
                                                  where only a temporary status is granted to casual
                                                  worker and no appointment is made in any
                                                  capacity against any post. The Delhi High Court
                                                  in the impugned judgment relies on proviso to Rule
                                                  20 for coming to the conclusion in para 7 of the
                                                  judgment.

 ::20::        OA 708/2016/CAT/PATNA BENCH


                   "7. The proviso, in our opinion,
         puts the controversy beyond a shade of
         doubt in that if an employee officiates in
         service or is treated as temporary railway
         servant and subsequently regularized or
         granted substantive appointment, the
         entire period of his combined service as
         temporary appointee followed by the
         service spent as a permanent employee
         has to be reckoned for the purpose of
         pension. Since Rule 20 does not deal with
         what is to be done with the period of
         service spent as casual labourer, para 20
         of the Master Circular 54 and para 2005
         of the IREM address the said issue. Being
         administrative instructions, they clarify
         that half the period spent as casual
         labourers would be eligible to be reckoned
         for purposes of pension."

         42. The above Proviso has to be read along with
         the main Rule 20, when main Rule 20 contemplates
         commencement of qualifying service from the date
         he takes charge of the post, the appointment to a
         post is implicit and a condition precedent. The
         proviso put another different condition that
         officiating or temporary service is followed,
         without interruption, by substantive appointment
         in the same or another service or post. The proviso
         cannot be read independent to the main provision
         nor it can mean that by only grant of temporary
         status a casual employee is entitled to reckon his
         service of temporary status for purpose of
         pensionary benefit.

 
43. The Delhi High Court in impugned judgment
         has not relied the subsequent judgment of Andhra
         Pradesh High Court in A.Ramanamma dated
         01.05.2009 and did not follow the judgment of this
         court in 
Chanda Devi
 case (Supra) on the ground
         that Rule 20 specifically the proviso has not been
         considered.
 
This Court in 
Chanda Devi
's case did
         not refer to Rule 20 since Rule 20 had no
         application in the facts of that case because the
         appointment of husband of respondent in 
Chanda
         Devi
's case was not against any post.
 
Rule 20
         being not applicable non-reference of Rule 20 by
         this Court in 
Chanda Devi
's case is
         inconsequential.
 
In para 8 of the impugned
         judgment, the Delhi High Court for not relying on
         
A.Ramanamma and Chanda Devi
 case gave
         following reasons:


                  "8. In the opinion of this Court,
         the subsequent ruling of the Andhra
         Pradesh          High       Court        in
         Ramanamma(supra), with respect, does
         not declare the correct law. Though the
         judgment has considered certain previous
         rulings as well as the provisions of the
         IREM and Rule 31 of the Railway
         Services(Pension) Rules, the notice of the
         Court was not apparently drawn in that
         case and the Court did not take into
         account Rule 20, especially the proviso
 ::21::        OA 708/2016/CAT/PATNA BENCH


         which specifically deals with the situation
         at hand. 
Likewise, Chanda Devi
(supra)
         did not consider the effect of Rule 20,
         which, in the opinion of this Court, entitles
         those who work as casual labourers; are
         granted temporary status, and; eventually
         appointed substantively to the Railways, to
         reckon the entire period of temporary and
         substantive appointment for the purposes
         of pension."


 
44. The judgment of Andhra Pradesh High Court
         in A.Ramanamma case had considered in detail
         the judgment of this Court in 
Chanda Devi
's case
         as well as Para 20 of Master Circular and para
         2005 of IREM and has also considered other case
         of this Court and has rightly come to the
         conclusion that casual labour after obtaining
         temporary status is entitled to reckon only half of
         the period.
 It may, however, be noticed that in A.
         Ramanamma case the Andhra High Court has
         also held that 50% of service as casual labour
         cannot be counted, which is not correct. Rule 31 of
         Rules, 1993 provides for counting of service paid
         from contingencies. Note 1 of Rule 31 provides:-

         " The provisions of this Rule shall also
         apply to casual labour paid from
         contingencies when Note 1 expressly
         makes applicable Rule 31 to the casual
         labour they are also entitled to reckon half
         of     casual      services    paid    from
         contingencies."

         45. Thus except to the above extent, the judgment
         of Andhra Pradesh High Court in A. Ramanamma
         case lays down the correct law.

          46. As observed above, the grant of temporary
         status of casual labour is not akin to appointment
         against a post and such contingency is not covered
         by Rule 20 and the same is expressly covered by
         Rule 31 which provides for "half the service paid
         from contingencies shall be taken into account for
         calculating pensionary benefits on absorption in
         regular employment subject to certain conditions
         enumerated there in." Thus Rule 31 is clearly
         applicable while computing the eligible services
         for calculating pensionary benefits on granting of
         temporary status.

         48. We, however, are of the view that the period of
         casual labour prior to grant of temporary status by
         virtue of Note-1 Rule 31 has to be counted to the
         extent of 50% for pensionary benefits.

         55. In view of foregoing discussion, we hold :

                  i) the casual worker after obtaining
         temporary status is entitled to reckon 50% of his
         services till he is regularised on a
         regular/temporary post for the purposes of
         calculation of pension.

                  ii)the casual worker before obtaining the
         temporary status is also entitled to reckon 50% of
         casual service for purposes of pension.

                  iii) Those casual workers who are
         appointed to any post either substantively or in
         officiating or in temporary capacity are entitled to
                                        ::22::          OA 708/2016/CAT/PATNA BENCH


                                                  reckon the entire period from date of taking charge
                                                  to such post as per Rule 20 of Rules, 1993.

                                                           iv) It is open to Pension Sanctioning
                                                  Authority to recommend for relaxation in
                                                  deserving case to the Railway Board for
                                                  dispensing with or relaxing requirement of any
                                                  rule with regard to those casual workers who have
                                                  been subsequently absorbed against the post and
                                                  do not fulfill the requirement of existing rule for
                                                  grant of pension, in deserving cases. On a request
                                                  made in writing, the Pension Sanctioning
                                                  Authority shall consider as to whether any
                                                  particular case deserves to be considered for
                                                  recommendation for relaxation under Rule 107 of
                                                  Rules, 1993.

                                                  56. In result, all the appeals are allowed. The
                                                  impugned judgments of Delhi High Court are set
                                                  aside. The writ petitions filed by the appellants are
                                                  allowed, the judgments of Central Administrative
                                                  Tribunal are set aside and the Original
                                                  Applications filed by the respondents are disposed
                                                  of in terms of what we have held in para 55 as
                                                  above.

                                                                                [Emphasis Supplied]



41.   Hon'ble High court, Patna in and CWJC No. 5111 of 2017 titled the

Union of India & Ors versus Binod Singh
 decided on 24.7.2017 and CWJC
No. 12459 of 2017 titled the 
Union of India & Os versus Ramjee and others

decided on 21.12.2017.
 
Their Lordships have followed the recent decision of
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of 
Union of India & Ors. Versus Rakesh
Kumar
 (supra). We think proper to refer the entire judgements of their
Lordships of our own Hon'ble High Court, Patna to answer the contentions of
the parties.
 
The Judgement dated 24.7.2017 in case of 
Union of India & ors
versus Binod Singh & Ors
 (supra) and dated 21.12.2017 in case of 
Union of
India & Ors versus Ramjee & ors
 (supra) for ready reference reads as under


:-



42.   The Hon'ble High Court, Patna Their Lordships have followed the recent
judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in case of 
Union of India Versus Binod
Singh
 (supra) vide judgment dated 24.07.2017 reads as:-




              "Heard learned Senior counsel for the petitioners and learned counsel for the
      private respondent.

              The decision of the Central Administrative Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as
      the "Tribunal"), Patna Bench, Patna dated 4th October, 2016 is subject matter of
      challenge before this Court. It is the direction issued in paragraph 10 of the said order,
      which is the bone of contention, which reads as under:

              "10. Accordingly, the OA is allowed. The respondents are directed to count
      100% period rendered under Temporary Status from 01.01.1981 and 50% service
                                  ::23::          OA 708/2016/CAT/PATNA BENCH


rendered as casual labourer from 01.12.1972 along with the 100% period after
regularization till the date of superannuation and thereafter to revise the entire
pensionary benefits and make payment of arrears thereof with interest @ 8% p.a. with
all consequential benefits within a period of two months from the date of receipt of a
copy of this order. However, there shall be no order as to costs."

 
The learned Senior counsel representing the Railways submits that in view of a
very recent decision of Hon'ble Apex Court rendered in the case of 
Union of India Vs.
Rakesh Kumar
 since reported in 2017 (3) PLJR SC 83; the very gamut of the dispute
as well as judgments of conflicting kind passed from time to time was considered by the
Division Bench in detail. The Court has explained those decisions and to harmonize
and bring about uniformity in relation to grant of benefit of pension for casual or
temporary status employees working in the Railway, by crystallizing its view in
concluding part of 
the said decision
. The ratio of 
the said decision
 of the Hon'ble Apex
Court is reproduced hereinbelow:-


         "55. In view of foregoing discussion, we hold:

         (i)      the casual worker after obtaining temporary status is entitled to
                  reckon 50% of his services till he is regularized on a
                  regular/temporary post for the purposes of calculation of pension.

         (ii)     the casual worker before obtaining the temporary status is also
                  entitled to reckon 50% of casual service for purposes of pension.

         (iii)    those casual workers who are appointed to any post either
                  substantively or in officiating or in temporary capacity are entitled to
                  reckon the entire period from date of taking charge to such post as
                  per Rule 20 of Rules, 1993.

         (iv)     It is open to Pension Sanctioning Authority to recommend for
                  relaxation in deserving case to the Railway Board for dispensing with
                  or relaxing requirement of any rule with regard to those casual
                  workers who have been subsequently absorbed against the post and do
                  not fulfill the requirement of existing rule for grant of pension, in
                  deserving cases. On a request made in writing, the Pension
                  Sanctioning Authority shall consider as to whether any particular case
                  deserves to be considered for recommendation for relaxation under
                  Rule 107 of Rules, 1993."

         If this is what has been held by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the decision
rendered on 24.03.2017 with regard to the calculation or reckoning of period of
casual as well as temporary status employees, which has been fixed at 50% for casual
and 50% for temporary status, the order of the Tribunal seems to be contrary to the
above legal view. Therefore, to harmonize and to further rule out further confusion
which the Tribunal may commit in passing further orders in similar dispute, the
impugned order dated 4th October, 2016 passed in O.A. No. 645/2015 is set aside.
The benefit of pension for the casual period and temporary status will be calculated
on 50/50 basis and pension will accrue accordingly.

         The stand of the counsel for the private respondent is that even in the latest
decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, not all decisions of the Hon'ble Apex Court,
has been taken into consideration nor was the circular of the Railway Board taken into
consideration.

 
Such a submission is required to be rejected on perusal of the order of the
Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of 
Union of India Vs. Rakesh Kumar
 (supra) because
the effort of the Hon'ble Apex Court is to harmonize diverse opinions which has been
vexing the courts, the time has come when the harmony sought to be restored by the
Hon'ble Apex Court be implemented.


         The impugned order dated 04.10.2016 passed in O.A. No. 645/2015 is set
aside and the writ application stands allowed."

                                                                     [Emphasis supplied]
                                        ::24::          OA 708/2016/CAT/PATNA BENCH



43.   The Hon'ble High Court, Patna, Their Lordships have taken a similar
view vide judgment dated 21.12.2017 in case titled 
Union of India and ors
versus Ramjee & Ors
 (supra) observing as under:-




               "Nobody appears on behalf of the private-respondent.
               Heard learned senior counsel representing the Railways. Perused the order,
      dated 29.03.2017, passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Patna Bench, Patna
      in O. P. No. 740 of 2016.

               The Tribunal obviously seems to have erred in directing the respondents to
      account 100 per cent period rendered in temporary status from 01.01.1981 and 50 per
      cent service rendered as casual labourer from 01.12.1972 along with the 100 per cent
      period after regularization till the date of superannuation for calculation of arrears
      and payments with interest of 8 per cent.

 
The Court, keeping in mind the decision rendered in the case of 
Union of
      India Vs. Rakesh Kumar
, reported in 2017 (3) PLJR SC 83 sets aside the impugned
      order with a modification that the calculation will be required to be done in terms of
      what the Apex Court has 
laid down in
 paragraph 55 of the said judgement, which
      reads as under:


                        "55. In view of forgoing discussion, we hold:

                        (i) the casual worker after obtaining temporary status is entitled to
               reckon 50 % of his services till he is regularized on a regular / temporary post
               for the purposes of calculation of pension.

                        (ii) the casual worker before obtaining the temporary status is also
               entitled to reckon 50 % of casual service for purposes of pension.

                        (iii) those casual workers who are appointed to any post either
               substantively or Patna High Court CWJC No.12459 of 2017 dt.21-12-2017
               3/3 in officiating or in temporary capacity are entitled to reckon the entire
               period from date of taking charge to such post as per Rule 20 of Rules, 1993.

                        (iv) It is open to Pension Sanctioning Authority to recommend for
               relaxation in deserving case to the Railway Board for dispensing with or
               relaxing requirement of any rule with regard to those casual workers who
               have been subsequently absorbed against the post and do not fulfill the
               requirement of existing rule for grant of pension, in deserving cases. On a
               request made in wring, the Pension Sanctioning Authority shall consider as
               to whether any particular case deserves to be considered for recommendation
               for relaxation under Rule 107 of Rules, 1993."

      The Writ Application stands allowed in terms of above."

                                                                          [Emphasis supplied]

44.   Bare perusal of judgements extracted hereinabove passed by their
Lordships of our own High Court, Patna, binding on this Tribunal. Their
Lordships were in seisin with identical issues in similar facts, whereby this
Tribunal in Original applicants issued direction on to count 100% period rendered
under temporary status before date of regularization and to count 50% service
rendered as Casual labourer before attaining temporary status with consequential
benefits. Their Lordships have observed in above cases of Binod Singh and
Ramjee (supra) extracted hereinabove that the orders of this Tribunal seems to
be contrary to the recent legal view in case of 
Union of India vs Rakesh Kumar

                                         ::25::          
OA 708/2016/CAT/PATNA BENCH



(supra) with regard to the reckoning of period of casual as well as temporary
employees as to 50% for casual period and 50% for temporary status period.


Their Lordships in above cited cases set-aside orders of this Tribunal in similar
dispute with modification in terms of paragraph 55 of the judgement in case of

Union of India & Ors. Versus Rakesh Kumar
 (supra).




45.    
In view, whereof, we hold that both the issues are no more res-integra and
squarely covered by recent and the elaborate judgement of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in case of 
Union of India & Ors. Versus Rakesh Kumar
 (supra) and as
analysed in preceeding paras by us that our own Hon'ble High Court, Patna and
their Lordships have followed ratio laid by Hon'ble Supreme Court in case of

Union of India & Ors. Versus Rakesh Kumar
 (supra) and this Tribunal is
bound by the decisions of our own Hon'ble High Court, Patna. Therefore, the
submissions advanced on the issue so far as to reckon 100% of service period
after obtaining temporary status instead of 50% before date of regularization by
Shri M.P. Dixit, learned counsel for the applicants, is hereby repelled.




46.    Shri M.P. Dixit, learned counsel for the applicants has placed reliance on
the judgement of Hon'ble Supreme Court in case of 
G.L. Batra versus State of
Haryana & Ors.
 (supra). We have carefully gone through the above cited
judgement.




47.    But it is settled position of law that judgment has got no universal
application rather the judgment is to be tested on the basis of fact of each case.
Reference in this regard be made to the judgment rendered of Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the case of 
Dr. Subramanian Swamy versus State of Tamil Nadu and
others
, (2014) 5 SCC75. The relevant paragraph 47 which reads as under--




       "47. It is a settled legal proposition that the ratio of any decision must be understood
       in the background of the facts of that case and the case is only an authority for what it
       actually decides, and not what logically follows from it. "The Court should not-place
       reliance on decisions without discussing as to how the factual situation fits in with the
       fact Situation of the decision on which reliance is placed."

                                                                      [Emphasis supplied]

48.    The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Nair Service Society vs Dr. T.Beer
Masthan in (2009) 5 SCC 545. Relevant para 48 reads as:-

       "48. Several decisions have been cited before us by the respondents, but it is well
       established that judgments in service jurisprudence should be understood with
       reference to the particular service rules in the State governing that field."

                                    ::26::        OA 708/2016/CAT/PATNA BENCH


                                                                [Emphasis supplied]

49.    We are now proceeding to examine the factual aspects as was in the case
of 
G.L. Batra
 (supra) and found that issue was related to "whether state
government is competent to vary the remuneration fixed to a constitutional
appointee to his disadvantage, after his appointment?" Mr. G.L. Batra worked as
senior most Addl. Secretary in the Lok-Saha and later on joined as member.
Haryana Public Service Commission. The issue related to re-fixation of
remuneration as per 
Regulation 6
 of the 1972.
 The learned single Bench of
Hon'ble High Court in Ram Phal Singh (supra) related to member, H.P.S.C held
in favour of member H.P.S.C and the Division Bench of Hon'ble High Court
Punjab & Haryana placing reliance on Ram Phal Singh case (supra), rendered
in M.P. Pandove (supra) again so which the SLP before Hon'ble Apex Court
was dismissed. The above facts were brought to knowledge of D.B. of Hon'ble
High Court of the Punjab and Haryana but the Division Bench overruled the
judgement in Ram Phal Singh's case (supra). The Hon'ble Supreme court in
such circumstances held in para 13 and 15 that High Court could not overrule
judgement of single bench which was affirmed by an another co-ordinate Bench
and should have referred the matter to a larger bench and when an earlier decision
may seem to be incorrect to a Bench but yet it will have the binding effect on the
later Bench of coordinate jurisdiction.



50.    But here in the case on hand we have analysed in detail the statutory
scheme for grant of pension and reckoning qualifying service to grant benefit of
pension for casual or temporary status employees working in the Railway. The
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the recent judgement in elaborate manner harmonized
the diverse opinions and our own Hon'ble High Court Patna, their Lordship
followed the ratio laid down in recent case of 
Union of India & Ors. Versus
Rakesh Kumar
 (supra) binding on this Tribunal.
 
Therefore with great respect
the judgement rendered in case of 
G.L. Batra
 (supra) relied by learned counsel
for the applicants in our opinion, not applicable in the facts and circumstances of
present case on hand.


                                      ::27::      OA 708/2016/CAT/PATNA BENCH


                                  CONCLUSION

51.    We have already analysed in detail the issue in light of aforesaid analysis.
Accordingly, our finding on issue no.1 is decided in favour of the applicants. We
hold that the period of casual labour prior to grant of temporary status in light of
Note 1 of Rule 31 of pension Rules 1993 all the applicants are entitled and
respondents are directed to verify and re-calculate, count to the extent of 50% for
revised pension and other retiral benefits and along with arrears within three
months from the date of receipt of the certified copy of the order passed today
failing which the interest shall be paid at the rate of 9% from the date of their
entitlement till final payment.

52.    Our findings so far as on issue no.2, we hold that to reckon 50% of service
period after obtaining temporary status till date of regularization and is correct
and in accordance with rules and all the applicants are not entitled to reckon of
100% temporary status period till their regularization/absorption on regular post.
Accordingly, we decide issue no.2 against all the applicants.

53.    Resultantly, the original application is partly allowed and disposed of to
the extent indicated herein above.

54.    There shall be no order as to costs.

55.    As a sequel thereof, pending miscellaneous application(s), if any, shall
also stands disposed of.

              Sd/-                                                      Sd/-
 (Ajay Pratap Singh)                                      (Sunil Kumar Sinha)
  Judicial Member                                       Administrative Member

bp/-
 

