



[Cites 
27
, Cited by 
0
]




Karnataka High Court


M/S Sanchaya Land And Estates Pvt Ltd vs Hdfc Bank Ltd on 25 November, 2025


Author: 
M.Nagaprasanna


Bench: 
M.Nagaprasanna


                           1



Reserved on   : 07.11.2025
Pronounced on : 25.11.2025                               R
       IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU

        DATED THIS THE 25TH DAY OF NOVEMBER, 2025

                         BEFORE

        THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M. NAGAPRASANNA

        CIVIL REVISION PETITION No.679 OF 2025 (IO)

                             C/W

        CIVIL REVISION PETITION No.680 OF 2025(IO)

IN CIVIL REVISION PETITION No.679 OF 2025

BETWEEN:

M/S. SANCHAYA LAND AND ESTATES PVT. LTD.,
HAVING ITS REGISTERED OFFICE AT
NO.315, 1ST MAIN ROAD
GANGANAGAR, BENGALURU - 560 032,
REPRESENTED BY ITS
AUTHORISED SIGNATORY,
MR. DASTAGIR SHARIFF
S/O NOORULLA SHARIFF

                                              ... PETITIONER
(BY SRI MANJUNATH S., ADVOCATE )

AND:

1.   HDFC BANK LTD.,
     (FORMERLY HDFC LTD.,
     PRIOR TO AMALGAMATION)
                            2




     A COMPANY INCORPORATED UNDER
     THE COMPANIES ACT, 1956,
     HAVING ITS REGISTERED OFFICE AT
     RAMON HOUSE, 169, BACKBAY RECLAMATION,
     H T PAREKH MARG,
     MUMBAI - 400 020.

2.   SRI DIVAKARAN SUNIL KUMAR
     S/O R DIVAKARAN
     AGED ABOUT 60 YEARS
     RESIDING AT ANANTHEN KERIL HOUSE,
     T V PURAM P.O, MUTHUDATHU KAVU,
     VAIKOM, KOTTAYAM DISTRICT,
     KERALA - 686 606.

3.   M/S.MRUDANI POWER CONTROLS
     A PROPRIETARY CONCERN OF
     SRI PARAMESHWAR H.S.
     HAVING OFFICE AT NO. 11,
     3RD CROSS, SUNKADAKATTE,
     BENGALURU - 560 091.
                                              ... RESPONDENTS

(BY SRI VARUN S., ADVOCATE FOR R-1;
    SRI SHIVARAJ N.ARALI, ADVOCATE FOR R-2)


     THIS CIVIL REVISION PETITION IS FILED UNDER SECTION
115 OF CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE 1908, PRAYING TO a. CALL FOR
RECORDS AND SET ASIDE THE ORDER DATED 03.09.2025 PASSED
IN COM.O.S.NO.145 OF 2023 ON THE FILE OF THE X ADDITIONAL
DISTRICT AND SESSIONS JUDGE (DEDICATED COMMERCIAL
COURT),   BENGALURU    RURAL   DISTRICT   AT   BENGALURU,
DISMISSING THE IA FILED BY THE PETITIONER UNDER ORDER 7
RULE 11 READ WITH SECTION 151 OF 
CPC
, TO REJECT THE
COUNTER CLAIM FILED BY THE DEFENDANT NO.1 IN THE INTEREST
OF JUSTICE AND EQUITY; b. ALLOW THE IA FILED BY THE
PETITIONER UNDER ORDER 7 RULE 11 OF THE 
CPC
 TO REJECT THE
                            3



COUNTER CLAIM FILED BY THE DEFENDANT NO.1/RESPONDENT
NO.2 AS AGAINST HE PETITIONER/DEFENDANT NO.2 IN COM
O.S.NO.145 OF 2023 ON THE FILE OF THE X ADDITIONAL
DISTRICT AND DESSEIONS JUDGE (DEDICATED COMMERCIAL
COURT), BENGALURU RURAL DISTRICT AT BENGALURU.


IN CIVIL REVISION PETITION No.680 OF 2025

BETWEEN:

M/S. SANCHAYA LAND AND ESTATES PVT. LTD.,
HAVING ITS REGISTERED OFFICE AT
NO.315, 1ST MAIN ROAD
GANGANAGAR,
BENGALURU - 560 032
REPRESENTED BY ITS
AUTHORISED SIGNATORY
MR. DASTAGIR SHARIFF
S/O NOORULLA SHARIFF.

                                            ... PETITIONER
(BY SRI MANJUNATH S., ADVOCATE )


AND:

1.   HDFC BANK LTD.,
     (FORMERLY HDFC LTD.
     PRIOR TO AMALGAMATION)
     A COMPANY INCORPORATED UNDER
     THE COMPANIES ACT, 1956,
     HAVING ITS REGISTERED OFFICE AT
     RAMON HOUSE, 169,
     BACKBAY RECLAMATION,
     H T PAREKH MARG,
     MUMBAI - 400 020.
                            4



2.   SRI DIVAKARAN SUNIL KUMAR
     S/O R.DIVAKARAN
     AGED ABOUT 60 YEARS
     RESIDING AT ANANTHEN KERIL HOUSE,
     T V PURAM P.O, MUTHUDATHU KAVU,
     VAIKOM, KOTTAYAM DISTRICT,
     KERALA - 686 606.

3.   M/S.BHARATHI ELECTRICALS
     A PROPRIETARY CONCERN OF
     SRI R P MANOJ KUMAR
     S/O RISHIPAL SINGH S.,
     AGED ABOUT 43 YEARS,
     RESIDING AT NO. 113,
     NGEF LAYOUT, 2ND STAGE,
     11TH CROSS, NAGARBHAVI,
     BENGALURU - 560 072.

4.   M/S. SREE CHARAN SOUHARDHA
     CO-OPERATIVE BANK LTD.,
     HEAD OFFICE AT NO. 87/1,
     H B SAMAJA ROAD, BASAVANAGUDI,
     BENGALURU - 560 004.
                                              ... RESPONDENTS

(BY SRI VARUN S., ADVOCATE FOR R-1;
    SRI SHIVARAJ N.ARALI, ADVOCATE FOR R-2)


     THIS CIVIL REVISION PETITION IS FILED UNDER SECTION
115 OF CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE 1908, PRAYING TO CALL FOR
RECORDS AND SET ASIDE THE ORDER DATED 03.09.2025 PASSED
IN COM.O.S.NO.146 OF 2023 ON THE FILE OF THE X ADDITIONAL
DISTRICT AND SESSIONS JUDGE (DEDICATED COMMERCIAL
COURT),   BENGALURU    RURAL   DISTRICT   AT   BENGALURU,
DISMISSIN THE IA NO.25 FILED BY THE PETITIONER UNDER
ORDER 7 RULE 11 OF 
CPC
, TO REJECT THE COUNTER CLAIM FILED
BY DEFENDANT NO.1 AS AGAINST DEFENDANT NO.2 IN THE
                                5



INTEREST OF JUSTICE AND EQUITY; b. ALLOW THE IA NO.25 FILED
BY THE PETITIONER UNDER ORDER 7 RULE 11 OF THE 
CPC
 TO
REJECT THE COUNTER CLAIM FILED BY THE DEFENDANT
NO.1/RESPONDENT        NO.2      AS      AGAINST        THE
PETITIONER/DEFENDANT NO.2 IN COM.O.S.NO.146 OF 2023 ON
THE FILE OF THE X ADDITIONAL DISTRICT AND SESSIONS JUDGE
(DEDICATED COMMERCIAL COURT), BENGALURU RURAL DISTRICT
AT BENGALURU.


    THESE CIVIL REVISION PETITIONS HAVING BEEN HEARD
AND RESERVED FOR ORDERS ON 07.11.2025, COMING ON FOR
PRONOUNCEMENT THIS DAY, THE COURT MADE THE FOLLOWING:-


CORAM:    THE HON'BLE MR JUSTICE M.NAGAPRASANNA


                           CAV ORDER


     The petitioner-defendant No.2, who is common in both these

petitions, is at the doors of this Court calling in question two

separate orders passed by the Commercial Court in Commercial

O.S.No.145 of 2023 and Commercial O.
S. 146
 of 2023, both dated

03-09-2025, by which the applications filed by the petitioner in

I.A.Nos.24 and 25 under 
Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC
, in the

respective suits, seeking rejection of the counter claim made by the

1st defendant come to be rejected. For the sake of convenience, the
                                 6



facts obtaining in Civil Revision Petition No.679 of 2025 would be

narrated.




     2. Heard Sri S.Manjunath, learned counsel appearing for the

petitioner, Sri S.Varun, learned counsel appearing for respondent

No.1 and Sri Shivaraj N. Arali, learned counsel appearing for

respondent No.2.



     3. Facts in brief, germane, are as follows:


     3.1.   1st    respondent-plaintiff   /   Housing   Development

Corporation is said to have sanctioned a housing loan to the 2nd

respondent-1st defendant for purchase of an apartment in the

apartment project "The Greens" of the petitioner-defendant No.2. A

sale agreement, construction agreement and a tripartite agreement

come to be executed between the 1st respondent-plaintiff, the 2nd

respondent-1st defendant and the petitioner-2nd defendant on

19-11-2014 and 25-04-2015. As per the said agreements, the

petitioner-defendant No.2 was required to retain possession of the

apartment purchased by the 2nd respondent-1st defendant until the
                                   7



completion of the project. The petitioner-defendant No.2 was

thereafter required to execute a registered sale deed in favour of

the 2nd respondent-1st defendant. As per the terms of the tripartite

agreement, the petitioner-defendant No.2 could not have cancelled

the allotment or refused to execute a registered sale deed in favour

of the 2nd respondent-1st defendant, without obtaining a no-

objection certificate from the 1st respondent-plaintiff. However, the

petitioner-defendant No.2 executes a registered sale deed in favour

of respondent No.3-defendant No.3 in respect of the apartment

purchased by 2nd respondent-1st defendant. Therefore, the 1st

respondent-plaintiff files a suit in Commercial O.S. No.145 of 2023

seeking specific performance of the tripartite agreement and a

direction directing the petitioner-defendant No.2 to execute a

registered sale deed in favour of the 2nd respondent-1st defendant

and to declare the sale deed dated 10-03-2020 executed by the

petitioner-2nd   defendant   in   favour   of      the    3rd   respondent-3rd

defendant to be null and void.



3.2. The petitioner/2nd      defendant     files    its   written   statement

contending that there was no cause of action against the present
                                   8



petitioner, as the 1st defendant had failed to pay the entire sale

consideration. Therefore, the agreement stood cancelled and after

such cancellation, a sale deed was executed in favour of defendant

No.3. The 1st defendant/2nd respondent herein also files his written

statement,   and   along   with       the   written   statement,   files   a

counterclaim not only against the plaintiff, but also against

defendant No.2, the co-defendant. By way of counterclaim, the 1st

defendant sought multiple reliefs including declaration of obligations

against the 2nd defendant under the agreements. The petitioner-

defendant No.2 files an application in I.A. No.24 to reject the

counter claim, on the score that a counter claim against a co-

defendant is not maintainable. The application so filed by the

petitioner comes to be rejected. Therefore, the petitioner-defendant

No.2 is now before this Court in the subject petitions.



      4. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner would

vehemently contend that a counterclaim is not maintainable against

a co-defendant. He would seek to place reliance upon the judgment

of the Apex Court in the case of ROHIT SINGH v. STATE OF

BIHAR reported in (2006) 12 SCC 734 and the judgment of the
                                 9



Punjab and Haryana High Court in the case of ASHOK KUMAR

SHARMA v. RAKESH KUMAR SHARMA reported in 2024 SCC

OnLine P & H 4859 to buttress his submission that counterclaim

against a co-defendant is not entertainable.



      5. Per contra, the learned counsel appearing for the 1st

respondent would vehemently refute the submissions in contending

that the petitioner has to first cross the threshold bar of

maintainability of the petition. It is his submission that a revision

petition against an interlocutory order passed by the Commercial

Court under 
Section 8
 of the Commercial Courts Act, 2015 ('the Act'

for short) cannot be held to be maintainable and if the revision is

not maintainable, none of the submissions of the petitioner should

merit any consideration. In the event this Court would hold that

revision is maintainable, the learned counsel for the 1st respondent

would seek to place reliance upon the judgment of the Apex Court

in   the   case   of   RAJUL    MANOJ     SHAH     v.   KIRANBHAI

SHAKRABHAI PATEL reported in 2025 SCC OnLine SC 1958 and

ROHIT SINGH to buttress his submission that counterclaim against

a co-defendant if it touches upon the rights of the plaintiff would be
                               10



maintainable. He would contend that the judgment rendered by the

Punjab and Haryana High Court is long before the judgment of the

Apex Court and, therefore, the judgment of the Apex Court in the

case of RAJUL MANOJ SHAH would prevail. The learned counsel

representing the 2nd respondent-1st defendant would also toe the

lines of the learned counsel appearing for the 1st respondent in

contending that petitions are not maintainable and even if it they

are held to be maintainable, he would adopt the submissions of the

1st respondent.



     6. I have given my anxious consideration to the submissions

made by the respective learned counsel and have perused the

material on record. In the light of the submissions and contra

submissions of respective parties, the following issues fall for my

consideration:

     (i)    Whether the revision against interlocutory orders
            passed by the Commercial Court would be
            maintainable and entertainable?

     (ii)   Whether the subject petitions can be converted
            into petitions under 
Article 227
 of the Constitution
            of India and issues be decided?
                                11



      (iii) Whether a counterclaim is maintainable against a
            co-defendant?


Issue No.1:

      (i)   Whether the revision against interlocutory orders
            passed by the Commercial Court would be
            maintainable and entertainable?



      7.1. The petitioner has preferred these revision petitions

assailing interlocutory orders rendered by the concerned Court in

the   aforementioned   commercial    original   suits.   Since   the

respondents have raised substantial objections touching the very

root of maintainability, this Court is compelled to now navigate the

statutory frame work that governs the threshold bar. For the said

purpose, it is necessary to advert to the relevant provisions of the

Act. 
Sections 8
 and 
13
 of the Act read as follows:

            "8. Bar against revision application or petition
      against     an   interlocutory    order.--Notwithstanding
      anything contained in any other law for the time being in
      force, no civil revision application or petition shall be
      entertained against any interlocutory order of a
      Commercial Court, including an order on the issue of
      jurisdiction, and any such challenge, subject to the
      provisions of 
Section 13
, shall be raised only in an appeal
      against the decree of the Commercial Court.
            ...                 ...                 ...
          13. Appeals from decrees of Commercial Courts and
      Commercial Divisions.--(1) Any person aggrieved by the
                                 12



     judgment or order of a Commercial Court below the level
     of a District Judge may appeal to the Commercial
     Appellate Court within a period of sixty days from the
     date of judgment or order.

           (1-A) Any person aggrieved by the judgment or
     order of a Commercial Court at the level of District Judge
     exercising original civil jurisdiction or, as the case may
     be, Commercial Division of a High Court may appeal to
     the Commercial Appellate Division of that High Court
     within a period of sixty days from the date of the
     judgment or order:

            Provided that an appeal shall lie from such orders passed
     by a Commercial Division or a Commercial Court that are
     specifically enumerated under 
Order XLIII of the Code of Civil
     Procedure
, 1908 (5 of 1908) as amended by this Act and
     
Section 37
 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of
     1996).

            (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
     for the time being in force or Letters Patent of a High Court, no
     appeal shall lie from any order or decree of a Commercial
     Division or Commercial Court otherwise than in accordance with
     the provisions of this Act."

                                                (Emphasis supplied)


A plain yet purposive reading of 
Section 8
 reveals that the

legislation has consciously employed a sweeping non-obstante

clause of express embargo against entertaining any civil revision

application or petition directed against an interlocutory order of a

Commercial Court.    The provision mandates that any challenge to

such order must await the stage of appeal directed against the
                                  13



decree, subject to the conditions in 
Section 13
 of the Act. 
Section

13
 deals with appeals from decrees of Commercial Courts. Any

person aggrieved by a judgment or order of a Commercial Court

exercising original civil jurisdiction as the case may be, may appeal

to the Commercial Appellate Division of the High Court.



      7.2. In the present case, the interlocutory orders impugned

concern rejection of application under 
Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC


preferred in both Commercial O.S.No.145 of 2023 and Commercial

O.S.No.146 of 2023, whereby, the petitioner - defendant No.2 have

sought rejection of the counter claim set up by defendant No.1 on

the ground that counter claim is not entertainable against a co-

defendant. Had these proceedings arisen in the regime of a regular

civil suit, a revision petition challenging the order refusing to reject

a plaint or counter claim under Order VII Rule 11(d) might have

well been maintainable.     However, the statutory landscape under

the Act is distinct, the statutory bar under 
Section 8
 is unequivocal

leaving little interpretative wiggle room.    The question therefore

becomes imperative whether on such statutory inhibition the Court

may nonetheless entertain such challenge.         The question is no
                                       14



longer res integra. A Division Bench of the High Court of Delhi in

the case of BLACK DIAMOND TRACKPARTS PRIVATE LIMITED

v. BLACK DIAMOND MOTORS PRIVATE LIMITED1, has held as

follows:

                                        "....     ....     ....

               9. The question of maintainability of a petition under
        
Article 227
 of the Constitution of India, with respect to
        proceedings in a commercial suit before the District Judge
        (Commercial) arose, because 
Section 8
 of the Commercial
        Courts Act as under:

                      "8. Bar against revision application or
              petition    against     an    interlocutory      order.--
              Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
              for the time being in force, no civil revision application
              or petition shall be entertained against any
              interlocutory order of a Commercial Court, including an
              order on the issue of jurisdiction, and any such
              challenge, subject to the provisions of 
section 13
, shall
              be raised only in an appeal against the decree of the
              Commercial Court."

               10. Expressly bars the remedy of "civil revision
        application or petition". It was deemed apposite to hear the
        counsels on, whether by use of the word "petition" in addition to
        the words "civil revision application", though with a "or"
        between them, the purport of 
Section 8
 supra was to also bar
        the remedy of 
Article 227
 petition with respect to proceedings in
        a commercial suit at the level of the District Judge. The remedy
        under 
Article 227
 of the Constitution of India, it was felt, was
        similar/identical/at par with the remedy of a civil revision
        application under 
Section 115
 of the CPC and it was thus
        deemed appropriate to frame the question no. (i) aforesaid and
        hear the counsels thereon. Similarly, it was deemed apposite to
        hear the counsels on the reasoning which prevail with the Single
        Judge, that since appeals against orders in a commercial suit at

1
    2021 SCC OnLine Del 3946
                            15



the level of the District Judge are to be heard by the
Commercial Appellate Division, petitions under 
Article 227
, if
maintainable, emanating from proceedings in such suits should
also be heard by the Commercial Appellate Division.
Accordingly, question no. (ii) aforesaid was framed.

       11. The senior counsel for the respondent in CM (M) No.
132/2021, in our view, has rightly contended and none of the
other counsels have controverted, that the remedy under 
Article
227
 being a constitutional remedy could not be affected by a
statute framed by a legislature which was itself a creature of
constitution. A creature of the Constitution of India cannot
act in negation of the provisions of the Constitution of
India. We are reminded of Surya Dev Rai v. Ram Chander
Rai (2003) 6 SCC 675, concerned with the impact of the
amendment in 
Section 115
 of the CPC brought about by
the amendment 
of the CPC
 with effect from 1st July, 2002.
In the wake of the said amendment, a question arose,
whether on such amendment restricting/limiting the
orders of the subordinate courts with respect to which a
revision application under 
Section 115
 of the CPC could
be preferred to the High Court, an aggrieved person was
completely deprived of the remedy of judicial review
under 
Article 227
 also. It was held, that curtailment of
revisional jurisdiction of the High Court did not take away
and could not have taken away the constitutional
jurisdiction of the High Court to issue a writ of certiorari
to a civil court, nor was the power of superintendence
conferred on the High Court under 
Article 227
 of the
Constitution taken away or whittled down. It was further
held that the said power continued to exists,
untrammelled by the amendment in 
Section 115
 CPC and
remained available to be exercised, subject to the rules of
self-discipline and practice, which were well settled.
Similarly, in State of Gujarat v. VakhatsinghjiVajesinghji,
Vaghela AIR 1968 SC 1481, Jetha Bai and Sons, Jew
Town,      Cochin v. SunderbasRathenai (1988)        1    SCC
722, State of H.P. v. DhanwantSingh (2004) 13 SCC
331 and Union of India v. Major General Shri Kant
Sharma (2015) 6 SCC 773 it was held that the legislature
cannot take away the power of superintendence of the
High Court under 
Article 227
 of the Constitution over all
Courts and Tribunals which are within the territories in
                             16



relation to which the High Court exercises its jurisdiction.
Rather, in L. Chandra Kumar v. Union of India (1997) 3 SCC
261, judicial review including under 
Article 227
, was held to be a
basic feature of the Constitution, even beyond the realm of
amendability and Clause 2(d) of 
Article 323A
 and Clause 3(d) of

Article 323B
, to the extent excluded the jurisdiction of the High
Court and Supreme Court under Articles 226/227 and 32 of the
Constitution with respect to matters falling within the
jurisdiction of the Courts and Administrative Tribunals referred
to therein, were held to be unconstitutional.

      12. Thus, the question no. (i) aforesaid is answered
by holding that the petition under 
Article 227
 of the
Constitution of India to the High Court with respect to
orders of the Commercial Courts at the level of the
District Judge is maintainable and the jurisdiction and
powers of the High Court has not been and could not have
been affected in any manner whatsoever by 
Section 8
 of
the Commercial Courts Act. The use of the word
"petition" in 
Section 8
 is not and could not have been
with reference to a petition under 
Article 227
 of the
Constitution and is with reference to a revision
application/revision petition only.
      ...                ...                  ...
       31. We are of the view that once the 
Commercial Courts
Act
 has expressly barred the remedy of a revision application
under 
Section 115
 of the CPC, with respect to the suits within its
ambit, the purpose thereof cannot be permitted to be defeated
by opening up the gates of 
Article 227
 of the Constitution of
India. The scope and ambit of a petition under 
Article 227

is much wider than the scope and ambit of a revision
application under 
Section 115
 of the CPC; whatever can
be done in exercise of powers under 
Section 115
 of the
CPC, can also be done in exercise of powers under 
Article
227
 of the Constitution. Allowing petitions under 
Article
227
 to be preferred even against orders against which a
revision application under 
Section 115
 CPC would have
been maintainable but for the bar of 
Section 8
 of the
Commercial Courts Act, would nullify the legislative
mandate of the 
Commercial Courts Act
. Recently, in Deep
Industries  Limited v. Oil  and    Natural    Gas    Corporation
Limited (2020) 15 SCC 706, in the context of petitions under
                                     17



        
Article 227
 of the Constitution of India with respect to orders in
        an appeal against an order of the Arbitral Tribunal under 
Section
        17
 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996, it was held that if
        petitions under Article 226/227 of the Constitution against
        orders passed in appeals under the 
Arbitration Act
 were
        entertained, the entire arbitral process would be derailed and
        would not come to fruition for many years. It was observed that
        though 
Article 227
 is a constitutional provision which remains
        untouched by an non-obstante Clause 5 of the 
Arbitration Act

        but what is important to note is that though petitions can be
        filed under 
Article 227
 against judgments allowing or dismissing
        First Appeals under the 
Arbitration Act
, yet the High Court would
        be extremely circumspect in interfering with the same taking
        into account the statutory policy, so that interference is
        restricted to orders which are patently lacking in inherent
        jurisdiction. Thus, though we are of the view that gates of
        
Article 227
 ought not to be opened with respect to orders in
        commercial suits at the level of the District Judge against which
        a revision application under 
CPC
 was maintainable but which
        remedy has been taken away by the 
Commercial Courts Act
, but
        abiding by the judgments aforesaid, hold that it cannot be said
        to be the law that jurisdiction under 
Article 227
 is completely
        barred. However the said jurisdiction is to be exercised very
        sparingly and more sparingly with respect to orders in such suits
        which under 
the CPC
 were revisable and which remedy has been
        taken away by a subsequent legislation i.e. the 
Commercial
        Courts Act
, and ensuring that such exercise of jurisdiction by the
        High Court does not negate the legislative intent and purpose
        behind the 
Commercial Courts Act
 and does not come in the
        way of expeditious disposal of commercial suits."

                                                    (Emphasis supplied)


The said judgment of the Division Bench of the Delhi High Court, is

followed by the High Court of Odisha in the case of NARAYAN

NAIK v. RANJITA NAIK2, wherein it is held as follows:


2
    2025 SCC OnLine Ori 2112
                              18



                           "....    ....    ....

      17. The provisions of 
Section 8
 of the Commercial
Courts Act, 2015 cannot operate as an absolute bar to
exercise    of    the    power      under     
Article 227
 of
the Constitution of India. 
Section 8
 despite its initial non-
obstante clause, cannot operate as an absolute bar to the
exercise of the power of judicial review by the High
Courts, which is conferred by the Constitution of
India under 
Article 227
 thereof, since the 2015 Act is a
subordinate legislation under the Constitution, the latter
being the ground norm of the Indian legal system cannot
obstruct    the    powers      of    this   Court      under

Articles 226
 and 
227
 of the Constitution of India.

        18. A creature of the Constitution of India cannot act in
negation of the provisions of the Constitution of India. This
Court is reminded of Surya Dev Rai v. Ram Chander Rai1,
concerned      with    the   impact     of   the    amendment     in

Section 115
 CPC brought about by the amendment 
of
the CPC
 with effect from 1-7-2002. In the wake of the said
amendment, a question arose, whether on such amendment
restricting/limiting the orders of the subordinate courts with
respect      to    which     a     revision     application    under

Section 115
 CPC could be preferred to the High Court, an
aggrieved person was completely deprived of the remedy of
judicial review under 
Article 227
 also. It was held, that
curtailment of revisional jurisdiction of the High Court did not
take away and could not have taken away the constitutional
jurisdiction of the High Court to issue a writ of certiorari to a
civil court, nor was the power of superintendence conferred on
the High Court under 
Article 227
 of the Constitution taken away
or whittled down. It was further held that the said power
continued to exists, untrammelled by the amendment in

Section 115
 CPC and remained available to be exercised,
subject to the rules of self-discipline and practice, which were
well          settled.         Similarly,         in State        of
Gujarat v. VakhatsinghjiVajesinghji       Vaghela2, Jetha    Bai   &
                                 3
Sons v. Sunderdas        Rathenai , State    of    H.P. v. Dhanwant
Singh4 and Union of India v. Shri Kant Sharma5 it was held that
the legislature cannot take away the power of Superintendence
of the High Court under 
Article 227
 of the Constitution over all
                              19



courts and tribunals which are within the territories in relation to
which the High Court exercises its jurisdiction. Rather, in L.
Chandra Kumar v. Union of India6, judicial review including
under 
Article 227
, was held to be a basic feature of
the Constitution, even beyond the realm of amendability and
Clause 2(d) of 
Article 323-A
 and Clause 3(d) of 
Article 323-B
, to
the extent excluded the jurisdiction of the High Court and
Supreme         Court      under       Articles 226/227 and 32 of
the Constitution with respect to matters falling within the
jurisdiction of the courts and Administrative Tribunals referred
to therein, were held to be unconstitutional.

       19. Parliament has, mandated that no civil revision
application or petition shall be entertained against the
interlocutory order of Commercial Court. Parliament has taken
care to provide that an interlocutory order on the issue of
jurisdiction also cannot be made the subject-matter of challenge
and any challenge to such order shall be raised only in an
appeal against the decree of Commercial Court. Having regard
to the legislative object and the intent of the legislature in
barring the remedy of revision, which is otherwise available to a
party in civil proceedings, the exercise of writ jurisdiction under

Article 227
 of the Constitution of India, though not ousted, yet
needs to be informed by the limited nature of the said
jurisdiction, lest the legislative object of proscribing revision
would be defeated if the legality, propriety and correctness of
every order passed by the Commercial Court is examined in
exercise of the supervisory jurisdiction under 
Article 227
 of
the Constitution of India.

       20. Thus this petition under 
Articles 226
 and 
227
 of
the Constitution of India with respect to orders of the
Commercial Courts at the level of the District Judge is
maintainable and the jurisdiction and powers of the High Court
have not been affected in any manner whatsoever by 
Section 8

of the Commercial Courts Act. However, this Court shall
endeavour to exercise restraint unless the matter warrants
interference."

                                            (Emphasis supplied)
                                 20



The Division Bench of the High Court of Delhi and the single judge

Bench of the High Court of Odisha, while analyzing the legislative

intent and the scheme of the Act, hold that the statutory bar

against revision under 
Section 8
 of the Act is absolute. Therefore,

interlocutory orders passed by Commercial Courts is not amenable

to revisional jurisdiction. The High Court of Delhi and the High Court

of Odisha in the afore-quoted judgments observe that jurisdiction

under 
Article 227
 can never be taken away by projecting a bar

against revision petitions created under 
Section 8
 of the Act. In that

light, the petitioner, in the case at hand, who has filed the revision

petitions ought to have preferred a petition under 
Article 227
 of the

Constitution of India.



      7.3. This Court, on 12-09-2025, had passed an order

disposing of these petitions on a submission made by the learned

counsel for the petitioner that he would file an appeal. Thereafter,

it was immediately moved contending that the appeal is not

maintainable and, therefore, the revision petitions would be

maintainable.   Owing to the application so filed by the petitioner,

this Court passed the following order on 24-09-2025:
                                 21



              "ORAL ORDER ON I.A.NO.2 OF 2025


            The subject petition was disposed on 12.09.2025 owing to
     the fact that an alternative remedy of filing an appeal was
     available. Learned counsel for petitioner has moved the matter
     on the score that the submission was erroneously made that an
     appeal remedy was available. According to the learned counsel,
     appeal is not a remedy that is available under the Statute and
     would submit that he would convince the Court.



           In that light, application is allowed and the order dated
     12.09.2025 stands recalled and petition is restored to file.



            Tag this petition along with CRP No.680 of 2025 and list
     the matters on 14.10.2025 to hear the learned counsel for
     petitioner and the respondents, further.



             In the light of interim order subsisting in the connected
     case, there shall be an interim order, in the subject petition as
     well, till the next date of hearing."



No doubt, an appeal as obtaining under 
Section 13
 of the Act would

not be maintainable, as it is only against a decree passed by the

Commercial Court. However, as held by the High Court of Delhi

followed by the High Court of Odisha, to which I am in complete

agreement of, the revision petition cannot be entertained. The

petitioner will have to prefer a petition under 
Article 227
 of the

Constitution of India and not a revision petition under 
Section 115


of the CPC. Therefore, I hold that revision petitions will not be

maintainable against interlocutory orders passed by the Commercial

Court under 
Section 8
 of the Act.

                                      22


Issue No.2:



        (ii)   Whether the subject petitions can be converted
               into petitions under 
Article 227
 of the Constitution
               of India and issues be decided?



        8.1. Having thus concluded that the present revision petitions

are not maintainable within the statutory contours of 
Section 8
 of

the Act, the issue now would be, whether this Court may in the

interest of justice, treat the present proceedings, as petitions

invoking the supervisory jurisdiction, of this Court under 
Article 227


of the Constitution of India.       Such treatment is neither novel nor

unprecedented. The power of the High Court under 
Article 227
 of

the Constitution of India, exists independent of and unaffected by

statutory curtailments applicable to the revisional jurisdiction under


the CPC
. The Apex Court in the case of COL.ANIL KAK (RETD.) v.



MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, INDORE3, has held as follows:



                                      "....    ....     ....



                2. All that the High Court has done is to treat the petition
        filed before it under Section 115 of the Code as a proceeding
        initiated under 
Article 227
 of the Constitution. The respondents
        had filed the revision originally and during the pendency of that
        revision the High Court appears to have taken a view that an
        order in an appeal arising from a proceeding under Order 39


3

    (2005) 12 SCC 734

                                  23




      Rules 1 and 2 of the Code, could not be challenged under
      Section 115 of the Code since the order was in the nature of an
      interlocutory order. In such a situation, in our view, the
      High Court rightly decided to permit the revision
      petitioners before it, to convert the same as a proceeding
      under 
Article 227
 of the Constitution. After all, the court
      could have done it on its own, even without a motion in
      that behalf by the petitioner. We see absolutely no
      ground to interfere with the said order on the grounds
      raised in this special leave petition. Hence, this special
      leave petition is dismissed."



                                                  (Emphasis supplied)


The Apex Court has expounded, that even when statutory

bar expressly curtails revisional or appellate remedies, such

ouster cannot be extended to trammel the constitutional

powers of the High Court under 
Article 226
 or 227 of the

Constitution of India. The Apex Court was considering whether

the High Court was right in treating a petition filed before it under

Section 115 of the Code as a proceeding under 
Article 227
 of the

Constitution of India. The High Court had decided the issue by

converting the revision petition into a petition under 
Article 227.




The Apex Court refused to interfere.

                                     24


 
8.2. A Division Bench of the High Court of Telangana in the

case    of   
NCC     LIMITED       v.    NATIONAL        INSTITUTE        OF

TECHNOLOGY NIT4
, has held as follows:




                                  "....    ....    ....

             15. The issue of maintainability of the present Civil
       Revision Petitions (CRPs) should be answered first.



             16. The bar contained in 
section 8
 of The
       Commercial Courts Act, 2015 ('the 2015 Act') pertains to
       entertaining Civil Revision Petitions from an interlocutory
       order of a Commercial Court including any order on the
       issue of jurisdiction of the Commercial Court. 
Section 8
 of
       the 2015 Act mandates that a challenge to an
       interlocutory order passed by a Commercial Court shall be
       filed in accordance with the statutory framework of
       
section 13
 of the 2015 Act. In other words, the correct route
       would be to file an appeal under 
section 13(1)
 or (1
A) of the
       Act
.



 
17. The Supreme Court in 
Shalini Shyam Shetty Vs.
       Rajendra Shankar Patil
 delineated the principles on the exercise
       of the High Court's jurisdiction under 
Article 227
 of the
       Constitution of India and limited the scope of such power in
       matters of interference in orders of Courts inferior to the High
       Courts. The power to interfere was circumscribed within the
       boundaries of patent perversity, gross or manifest failure of
       justice or violation of the principles of natural justice. In other
       words, the Supreme Court held that the power of
       superintendence should be sparingly exercised only in fit cases
       i.e., to keep strict administrative control of the Courts within the
       territory of the High Court.




4


 Civil Revision Petition Nos. 2714, 2715 and 2716 of 2024 decided
on 29-04-2025

                              25


 
18. A Division Bench of this High Court in 
M.V.Ramana
Rao Vs. N.Subash
 considered the issue of maintainability of a
CRP against the embargo contained in the 2015 Act and diluted
the stricture contained therein by drawing a distinction between
the power of revision under section 115 of The 
Code of Civil
Procedure
, 1908 ('
CPC
') and under 
Article 227
 of the
Constitution of India. The High Court held that the power of
judicial review under 
Article 227
 cannot be taken away by

section 8
 of the 2015 Act but cautioned against misuse of
the power in undeserving cases. A Division Bench of the
High Court of Andhra Pradesh expressed the same
opinion i.e., 
section 8
 of the 2015 Act is confined to a CRP
filed under 
section 115
 of the CPC and does not operate
as a bar to the jurisdiction of a High Court under 
Article
227
 of the Constitution of India.




        19. 
In 
Blue Cube Germany Assets Gmbh And Co. KG Vs.
Vivimed Labs Limited
, a Division Bench of the erstwhile High
Court of Judicature at Hyderabad for the State of Telangana and
Andhra Pradesh clarified that although the nomenclature given
by the Court under 
Article 227
 of the Constitution of India is
'Civil Revision Petition' it is not equivalent to a Revision Petition
under 
section 115
 of the CPC. It was further clarified that
the power of judicial superintendence vested in a High
Court under 
Article 227
 of the Constitution cannot be
equated to ordinary revisional jurisdiction. The Court also
clarified that the petitions filed under 
Article 227
 in
several High Courts are not referred to as 'Civil Revisions'
but as 'Writ Petitions (Civil)'. In other words, the Division
Bench held that the nomenclature of 'Civil Revision
Petition' to petitions filed under 
Article 227
 would not fall
within the statutory bar in 
section 8
 of the 2015 Act.




      20. The discussion becomes somewhat academic in view
of the Supreme Court's decision in Col. Anil Kak (Retd.) Vs.
Municipal Corporation, Indore where it was held that a High
Court is authorized to convert a petition filed under

section 115
 of the CPC to a proceeding under 
Article 227

of the Constitution on its own even without a motion in
that behalf by the petitioner before it.



      21. Therefore, the argument of the respondent that the
CRPs are not maintainable in view of the bar in 
section 8
 of the

                                   26




      2015 Act cannot be accepted. We accordingly hold that the CRPs
      are maintainable."

                                           (Emphasis supplied)


The Division Bench of the High Court of Telangana follows the

judgment of the Apex Court in the case of ANIL KAK supra. The

Division Bench also was faced with the circumstance of non-



maintainability of revision petition filed against an interlocutory

order under 
Section 8
 of the Commercial Courts Act. The Division

Bench holds that filing of a petition under 
Section 115
 CPC does not

operate as a bar to the jurisdiction of a High Court under 
Article

227
 of the Constitution of India, but however in the facts holds that

civil revision petition is maintainable.



      8.3. Driving back to the cases at hand, as observed

hereinabove, the petitions are filed under 
Section 115
 of the CPC

projecting them to be revision petitions against an order rejecting

the counterclaim under 
Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC
. In the light

of the law laid down by the Apex Court, which is followed by the

Division Bench of the High Court of Telangana under identical

circumstance, I deem it appropriate to answer the core issue in the

                                 27




cases at hand, by converting the subject petitions, to that of

petitions under 
Article 227
 of the Constitution of India. I therefore,

answer the issue accordingly.



Issue No.3:



      (iii) Whether a counterclaim is maintainable against a
            co-defendant?



      9.1. The subject issue forms the kernel of the conundrum.



This concerns the issue of maintainability of a counterclaim directed

against a co-defendant.    The plaintiff is HDFC Bank. The plaintiff

institutes the suits in Commercial O.S.Nos.145 of 2023 and 146 of

2023 for specific performance of a tripartite agreement which

directs the present petitioner to execute a sale deed in favour of the

1st defendant. The second prayer in both suits is to declare the sale

deeds dated 10-03-2020 and 13-03-2020 executed by the present

petitioner in favour of the 3rd defendant to be null and void. The 3rd

prayer is to declare that the plaintiff has exclusive charge over the

suit schedule property. The cause of action that leads to the

institution of both the suits is that the petitioner/developer has an

agreement with the homebuyer and the plaintiff-Bank, but the

                                   28




developer   sells   the   property     to   defendant      No.3      during   the

subsistence of a mortgage between the other two. Two suits spring

on identical cause of action between these parties as there were

two transactions. Defendants 1 and 2 filed separate written

statements. While so doing, the 1st defendant files a counter claim

against the plaintiff and the 2nd defendant. Therefore, the issue is

whether the counterclaim of defendant No.1 against the 2nd

defendant was maintainable.       The actions then spring - one from

the hands of the plaintiff, the HDFC Bank and the other from the

hands of the present petitioner/defendant No.2, the developer. The

concerned   Court    on   the   following        reasons   rejects    both    the

applications. The reasons so rendered insofar as they are germane,

in Commercial O.S.No.145 of 2023, are as follows:



                                  "....       ....     ....



            26. But, in the humble opinion of this court, this case law
     also cannot be relied upon and applied by this court. Because,
     this decision also is not rendered on the order passed on the
     application filed under order VII rule 11 
of CPC
. It is rendered
     on the order passed on the application filed under 
section 10
 of
     CPC. As mentioned above, in this decision, also, it is not the
     observation of Hon'ble High court that in such case, the counter
     claim of the defendant shall be resulted in the rejection of plaint
     invoking order 7 rule 11 
of CPC
. The question before the said
     court was also not whether the defendant can make a counter
     claim against the co-defendant or not. The question was as to
     whether there is application of 
section 10
 of CPC to the facts

                              29




and circumstances of the said case or not. This can be easily
make out from the observations of the Hon'ble High Court in
para no.11 of the said judgment. It is clearly observed in the
said para that the interse dispute between the plaintiff and
defendant is not a subject matter of earlier suit. They are co-
defendants in the earlier suit. The plaintiff cannot file cross suit
against defendant to protect his suit land in the pending first
appeal and thus present suit is very much maintainable and not
liable to be stayed.



 
27. Moreover, it is to be noted that in 
Rohit Singh Vs
State of Bihar
 referred supra, with due respect and in the
humble opinion of this court, Hon'ble Supreme Court has not
held that the counter claim is not maintainable against the co-
defendant. As per the observations of the said case, if the
counter claim is made solely against co-defendant, then it is not
maintainable. If the counter claim-is made incidentally or along
with the plaintiff, then it is maintainable. In this regard for
clarity and brevity and for ready reference, the observation of
the Hon'ble Supreme court in para 21 of 
the said judgment
 is
extracted hereunder.




             21. Normally, a counter-claim, though based
      on a different cause of action than the one put in
      suit by the plaintiff could be made. But, it appears
      to us that a counter-claim has necessarily to be
      directed against the plaintiff in the suit, though
      incidentally or along with it, it may also claim
      relief against the co-defendants in the suit. But a
      counter-claim directed solely against the co-
      defendants cannot be maintained. By filing a
      counter-claim the litigation cannot be converted
      into some sort of an interpleader suit. Here,
      defendants 3 to 17 had no claim as against the
      plaintiff except that they were denying the right
      put forward by the plaintiff and the validity of the
      document relied on by the plaintiff and were
      asserting a right in themselves. They had no case
      even that the plaintiff was trying to interfere with
      their claimed possession. Their whole case was
      directed against defendants 1 and 2 in the suit and
      they were trying to put forward a claim as against
      the State and were challenging the claim of the
      State that the land involved was a notified forest
      in the possession of the State. Such a counter-

                            30


      claim, in our view, should        not   have   been
      entertained by the trial court.



 
28. From the above observation of the Hon'ble
Supreme court it is very clear that there is no bar for the
defendant to make a counter claim against the co-
defendant if same is directed along with the plaintiff.
Such claim may be incidental or along with the plaintiff.
However, such claim solely against the co-defendant
cannot be maintained. Therefore, the decision relied upon by
the defendant No.2 as per decision reported in 2024 SCC on
line MP 1301 stated supra is also not useful to the defendant
No.2. The another decision relied upon by the defendant No.2 is
the decision reported in 2024 SCC on line P and H 4859
rendered in case of 
Ashok Kumar Sharma Vs Rakesh Kumar
Sharma and others
. The defendant No. 2 relying upon
observation Hon'ble High Court made in para 18, 19 and 20 of

the said decision
 contended that the counter claim of the
defendant against the co-defendant is not maintainable and
liable to be rejected under order VII rule 11 
of CPC
.




       29. But, again it is significant to note that this
decision is also not rendered in the background of the
application under order 7 rule 11 
of CPC
. The facts and
circumstances of this case and the relied case also are
different and distinguishable. In the present suit, it is to
be noted that the plaintiff, defendant No.1 and defendant
No.2 have entered into Tripartite Agreement dated
25/04/2015. There are numerous obligations to be
performed by each party as per the said document. Those
obligations are mutual and ancillary each other. As per
the said document each party is entitled for seeking the
performance. Admittedly the defendant no.2 has sold the
subject flat to the defendant No.3. 
If it was not sold, even
the defendant No. 2 could have been sought for specific
performance against the plaintiff and defendant No.1.
Therefore, the set of facts and circumstances involved in
the present case and that of the case relied. by the
defendant No.2 are different and distinguishable. Hence
,

the said decision
 is also not applicable to the case.




 
30. All the more, it is to be noted even for the sake
of arguments, it is taken that all the decisions relied upon

                           31




by the defendant No.2 are applicable to the case on hand
and the counter claim of the defendant No.1 is not
maintainable, even then, in the opinion of this court, the
application filed by the defendant No.2 cannot be allowed
by this court. Because, none of the decisions relied upon
by the defendant no.2 lays down the law that if the
counter claim is not maintainable, then such the counter
claim of the defendant has to be rejected under order VII
rule 11 
CPC
. However, under these circumstances, a
question may arise as to what happens to the counter-
claim made by the defendant and how it would effect the
co-defendant against whom counter-claim is made. It is
to be noted that answer to this question can be found in
the third judgment relied upon by the defendant No.2
rendered in case of 
Ashok kumar Sharma Vs Rakesh
Kumar
 sharma and other stated supra.
 
In para 20 of 
the
said judgment
 the Hon'ble High Court of Punjab and
Hariyana relied upon its earlier decision rendered in case

Soma Devi Vs Dashmiri Lal
 reported in 2017 (4) Law
herald 3362 and held that:




           "In case defendant filed counter claim
     against a co-defendants then co-defendant has not
     been given any right to file written statement to
     the counter claim under order VII rule 6A. Nor has
     a defendant been given any entitlement to make
     an application for exclusion of a counter claim filed
     by co-defendant against him. Nor the default of a
     defendant to file written statement in counter
     claim by a co-defendant, is prescribed as ground
     for pronouncing the judgment against such a co-
     defendant. Even the balance of the relief after
     adjustment of counter claim is not contemplated
     to be granted against the co-defendant by 
the
     CPC
."



     31. As such from the above observations of the
Hon'ble Punjab and Hariyana High Court, what this court
conclude is that, if the defendant makes a counter-claim
which is not provided under law, then the co-defendant
against whom the counter claim is made need not
answer such counter claim. Under such circumstances,
the averments made by way counter claim by the co-
defendant become redundant and useless. Ultimately.

                            32


while deciding the case on merits, the court can give a
finding over it. It is to be noted that as per the
contentions of the defendant No.2, the law does not
provide the defendant No.1 for the filing the counter-
claim against the co-defendant/Defendant No.2. If that is
the case, at the same time, it has to be noted that law
also does not provide for filing application for rejection of
counter-claim made against co-defendant. It is to be
noted that in the present case, it is not that the counter-
claim of the defendant is barred under any law, but is a
case where there is no provision for filing the counter
claim by the defendant against the co-defendant. Unless
and until some law prohibits the counter-claim of the co-
defendant No.1, this court is bound to take it on record.
This court can decide its maintainability its proof, validity
etc., during the trial. The plaintiff and defendant No.2 can
convince this court on merits about the counter claim of
the defendant no.1 against them. Therefore, under these
circumstances, viewed from any angle, at this stage, the
question of rejecting the counter claim of the defendant
No.1, against the defendant No.2 or the plaintiff, that too
invoking order VII rule 11 
of CPC
 would not arise at all.
Therefore, application filed by the defendant No.2 has to be
rejected. Accordingly, point No.2 is answered in the
negative.



       32. Point No. 3: In view of this court's answers to point
No. 1 to 3 this Court proceeds to pass the following:



                                ORDER

           IA No.23 filed by the plaintiff under
      Order 7 Rule 11(b) and (d) read with 
Section
      151
 of CPC and IA-24 filed by the defendant
      No. 2 under order 7 rule 11 
of CPC
 to reject
      the counter claim of the defendant No.1 are
      hereby rejected.



            Call for further chief of Dw1 and 2.



           It is notice that since long time the case
      is pending for trial. The parties are making
      the applications one or other. This was also

                                  33




            once posted for argument. Therefore, all the
            parties to the suit are directed to complete
            the proceedings without seeking further
            adjournments.



                  Call on 04/09/2025."



                                            (Emphasis added)

It is the aforesaid order that has driven the petitioner to this Court

in the subject petitions. What was projected before the concerned

Court is projected before this Court as well. Therefore, it becomes

necessary to notice the provision of law viz., Order VIII Rule 6A &

6E 
of the CPC
, which deal with counter claim and default of plaintiff

to reply to the counter-claim. They read as follows:



            "6A. Counter-claim by defendant.--(1) A defendant
      in a suit may, in addition to his right of pleading a set-off
      under rule 6, set up, by way of counter-claim against the
      claim of the plaintiff, any right or claim in respect of a
      cause of action accruing to the defendant against the
      plaintiff either before or after the filing of the suit but
      before the defendant has delivered his defence or before
      the time limited for delivering his defence has expired,
      whether such counter-claim is in the nature of a claim for
      damages or not:



            Provided that such counter-claim shall not exceed the
      pecuniary limits of the jurisdiction of the court.



            (2) Such counter-claim shall have the same effect as a
      cross-suit so as to enable the Court to pronounce a final
      judgment in the same suit, both on the original claim and on the
      counter-claim.

                                    34


               (3) The plaintiff shall be at liberty to file a written
        statement in answer to the counter-claim of the defendant
        within such period as may be fixed by the court.



              (4) The counter-claim shall be treated as a plaint and
        governed by the rules applicable to plaints."



 
(Emphasis supplied)


A perusal at Order VIII Rule 6A would in the first blush indicate any

counterclaim is required to be directed only against the plaintiff and

not against the defendants. The Apex Court in the case of 
ROHIT

SINGH5
 supra interprets the very provision, and holds as follows:




                                     "....    ....    ....



               21. Normally, a counterclaim, though based on a
        different cause of action than the one put in suit by the
        plaintiff could be made. But, it appears to us that a
        counterclaim has necessarily to be directed against the
        plaintiff in the suit, though incidentally or along with it, it
        may also claim relief against the co-defendants in the
        suit. But a counterclaim directed solely against the co-
        defendants      cannot      be   maintained.     By    filing   a
        counterclaim the litigation cannot be converted into some
        sort of an interpleader suit. Here, Defendants 3 to 17 had no
        claim as against the plaintiff except that they were denying the
        right put forward by the plaintiff and the validity of the
        document relied on by the plaintiff and were asserting a right in
        themselves. They had no case even that the plaintiff was trying
        to interfere with their claimed possession. Their whole case was
        directed against Defendants 1 and 2 in the suit and they were
        trying to put forward a claim as against the State and were
        challenging the claim of the State that the land involved was a
        notified forest in the possession of the State. Such a



5

    (2006) 12 SCC 734

                                      35




        counterclaim, in our view, should not have been entertained by
        the trial court."



                                                      (Emphasis supplied)


The Apex Court holds, normally a counter claim though based on

different cause of action than the one put in the suit by the plaintiff,

could not be made. But, in the case before the Apex Court the

counterclaim was necessarily directed against the plaintiff though

incidentally along with it, it had a relief claimed against a co-



defendant. If the relief claimed against co-defendant touches upon

a counter claim on the plaintiff, it would become maintainable is

what the Apex Court holds.



        9.2. A learned single Judge of this Court interpreting 
Order

VIII Rule 6A CPC
 in the case of M/s ALLIANCE UNIVERSITY v.



SUDHIR6, has held as follows:



                                     "....    ....      ....



              84. Order VIII, Rule 6 A 
of the CPC
 deals with counter-
        claim by defendant. It is as under:



              6A. Counter-claim by defendant:



              (1)    A defendant in a suit may, in addition to his right
                    of pleading a set-off under rule 6, set up, by way


6

    2017 SCC Online Kar 1084

                              36




            of counter-claim against the claim of the plaintiff,
            any right in respect of a cause of action accruing
            to the defendant against the plaintiff either
            before or after the filing of the suit but before the
            defendant has delivered his defence or before the
            time limited for delivering his defence has
            expired, whether such counter-claim is in the
            nature of claim for damages or not:



                   Provided that such counter-claim shall not
            exceed the pecuniary limits of the jurisdiction of
            the Court.



      (2)   Such counter-claim shall have the same effect as
            a cross-suit as to enable the Court to pronounce
            a final judgment in the same suit, both on the
            original claim and on the counter-claim.



      (3)   The plaintiff shall be at liberty to file a written
            statement in answer to the counter-claim of the
            defendant within such period as may be fixed by
            the Court.



      (4)   The counter-claim shall he treated as a plaint and
            governed by the rules applicable to plaints."



      85. A bare perusal of 
Order VIII, Rule 6A of the CPC

clearly reveals that the counter-claim is to be filed
"against the claim of the plaintiff". It can be filed with
regard to "any right or cause of action accruing to the
defendant", but "against the plaintiff. That the counter-
claim can be filed only "against the plaintiff" is further
borne out by Or. VIII, Rules 6B to 6F 
of the CPC
. Thus,
the counter-claim cannot be filed against any other
person or entity who is not the plaintiff. It is, indeed, trite
to state that the purpose of permitting a counter-claim to
be filed in a suit is to lessen multiplicity of litigation.
Since the suit and the counter-claim are to be tried
together, the common trial permits the same court to
decide the issues which may not only be common, but
also may be proved by same or similar evidence.
Therefore, the counter-claim can be filed only qua the
plaintiff. Of course, it is true that through the counter-
claim the defendant is permitted to raise other cause of
action, besides the ones raised by the plaintiff. But

                                     37




        nonetheless, the focus of the other cause of action still
        has to be "against the plaintiff", and not against others."



                                                    (Emphasis supplied)


The learned Judge holds that the counter claim against the

defendant no doubt can be made, but the cause of action and focus

should still be against the plaintiff and not the other co-defendant.



        9.3. The Apex Court in the case of RAJUL MANOJ SHAH v.



KIRANBHAI SHAKRABHAI PATEL7, after considering ROHIT

SINGH and the law on the issue has held as follows:



                                  "....    ....    ....



               17. Re: Defendant no. 2's claim of specific relief not
        maintainable against appellant: Ld. Sr. Counsel for the
        appellant has argued that in terms of 
Order VIII Rule 6A of CPC
,
        a counter-claim must be filed seeking relief against the plaintiff
        and cannot be filed against a co-defendant, for a counter-claim
        must necessarily deal with the defendant's cause of action
        against the plaintiff. On the other hand, Ld. Counsel for the
        respondent submits that the counter-claim seeks two
        substantive reliefs, namely, partition and specific performance.
        Consequently, it is contended that the counter-claim is not
        directed solely against a co-defendant, for, in an independent
        suit seeking the very same reliefs, the appellant would
        necessarily have to be impleaded as a party. The ultimate relief
        sought by defendant no. 2 is a declaration of co-ownership of
        the deceased sister-in-law of plaintiff and a consequent decree
        of specific performance as against that ownership on the basis
        of the agreement of sale.



7


    2025 SCC Online SC 1958

                               38


      18. Order VIII, Rule 6A, 
CPC
 enables a defendant to set
up a counter-claim. Said provision is extracted as below;



              6A. Counter-claim      by    defendant.--(1)       A
      defendant in a suit may, in addition to his right of
      pleading a set-off under rule 6, set up, by way of
      counter-claim against the claim of the plaintiff, any right
      or claim in respect of a cause of action accruing to the
      defendant against the plaintiff either before or after the
      filing of the suit but before the defendant has delivered
      his defence or before the time limited for delivering his
      defence has expired, whether such counter-claim is in
      the nature of a claim for damages or not:



             Provided that such counter-claim shall not exceed
      the pecuniary limits of the jurisdiction of the court.



      (2)    Such counter-claim shall have the same effect as
             a cross-suit so as to enable the Court to
             pronounce a final judgment in the same suit,
             both on the original claim and on the counter-

             claim.



      (3)    The plaintiff shall be at liberty to file a written
             statement in answer to the counter-claim of the
             defendant within such period as may be fixed by
             the court.



      (4)    The counter-claim shall be treated as a plaint and
             governed by the rules applicable to plaints.



                                            (emphasis supplied)


 
19. As per Rule 6-A(1), a defendant may assert any
right or claim against the plaintiff before the filing of the
written statement, even if such cause of action is
unrelated to the plaintiff's suit. The only limitation is that
the counter-claim must lie within the pecuniary
jurisdiction of the court. Such a counter-claim is treated
as a cross-suit and is governed by the rules applicable to
plaints, including the obligation to disclose the cause of
action and pay requisite court fees. The legislative intent
is to avoid multiplicity of proceedings by allowing both
the original suit and the counter-claim to be tried and

                             39




disposed of in a single trial, thereby avoiding prolonged
and protracted litigation as held in 
Jag Mohan
Chawla v. Dera Radha Swami Satsang
.




 
20. Rule 6A provides that counter-claim shall be
against the claim of the plaintiff and such right or claim
shall be in respect of cause of action accruing to
defendant against the plaintiff. This Court in 
Rohit
Singh
 (supra) held;




             "21. Normally, a counterclaim, though based
      on a different cause of action than the one put in
      suit by the plaintiff could be made. But, it appears
      to us that a counterclaim has necessarily to be
      directed against the plaintiff in the suit, though
      incidentally or along with it, it may also claim
      relief against the co-defendants in the suit. But a
      counterclaim directed solely against the co-
      defendants cannot be maintained. By filing a
      counterclaim the litigation cannot be converted
      into some sort of an interpleader suit....."



 
21. The above observations have been reiterated with
approval in subsequent pronouncement in 
DamodharNarayan
Sawale v. Tejrao Bajirao Mhaske
, by observing as under;




 
"39. The decision of this Court in 
Rohit
      Singh v. State of Bihar
 also assumes relevance in the
      above context. This Court held that a defendant could
      not be permitted to raise counterclaim against co-
      defendant because by virtue of Order 8 Rule 6-A 
CPC
, it
      could be raised by the defendant against the claim of
      the plaintiff."




 
22. In the present case, defendant no. 2 sought to raise a
counter-claim primarily for the relief of specific performance of
agreement dated 21.10.2011 executed in his favour by
deceased original defendant no. 1 with respect to her undivided
share in the suit property, by a direction to the Nazir, the
substituted representative of defendant no. 1, to execute a sale
deed in pursuance of the agreement to sell. The relief of
specific performance as sought to be raised by defendant
no. 2 cannot be set up by way of a counter-claim since
the same is not directed against the appellant/plaintiff,

                                  40




      but is instead directed solely against the co-defendant. In
      view of this, defendant no. 2 is held to be disentitled to
      raise prayer of specific performance by way of counter-
      claim. This is simply not permissible, and this position is
      no more res-integra in view of the decision of this Court
      in 
Rohit Singh
 (supra).




             23. Defendant no. 2 however submits that he has not
      only claimed the relief of specific performance, but has also
      sought partition of suit property to separate the share he is
      entitled to under the agreement. Defendant must first establish
      a right of claim over the property, which is absent9 till he
      succeeds against the estate of defendant no. 1 and only
      thereafter that the question of setting up a counter claim
      against plaintiff may arise. Thus, the submission that there is
      also a claim for partition must fail for the same reason."



 
(Emphasis supplied)


      9.4.   A   meticulous   examination     of   the   Authorities    is

indispensable to resolve the present controversy. The Apex Court

in the case of 
ROHIT SINGH
 supra holds that a counterclaim by its

very nature, is a defendants' actionable claim against the plaintiff

and ordinarily cannot be an independent claim against the co-




defendant.   The Apex Court observes that permitting such cross-



litigation within the same suit would distort the procedural fabric of

the lis and blur the roles of the plaintiff/s and the defendant/s. In

ASHOK KUMAR SHARMA, the Punjab and Haryana Court adopted

a similar view.      It reaffirmed that a counterclaim directed

                                  41




exclusively against the co-defendant is not maintainable.          On a

plain reading of Order VIII Rule 6-A 
of CPC
 contemplates a

counterclaim against the plaintiff and not inter se between the

defendants. The legal position as enunciated in the case of ROHIT

SINGH is reiterated in RAJUL MANOJ SHAH, but with a degree of

refinement. The Apex Court in RAJUL MANOJ SHAH considers the

purpose and sweep of Order VIIII Rule 6-A 
CPC
. The Apex Court

holds that, while it is true that a counter claim is primarily intended

as a defendant/s claim against the plaintiff, the mere fact that

reliefs sought against the plaintiff incidentally or necessarily affect a

co-defendant, or incidentally touches upon the claim of the plaintiff,

such counterclaim would not become contrary to law. It is trite that

the counterclaim substantially concerns or implicates the plaintiff.



If the counter-claim so filed against a co-defendant implicates or

concerns the plaintiff and not solely the co-defendant, the said

counterclaim   does   not   vitiate   its   maintainability.   What    is

impermissible in law is a counterclaim exclusively against a

co-defendant, one that bears no nexus to the plaintiff's claim

or the lis between the plaintiff and the defendants.

                                  42


 
9.5. The Apex Court in the case of RAJUL MANOJ SHAH

supra considers the judgment in the case of 
ROHIT SINGH
 supra

and holds that defendant No.2 sought to raise a counterclaim

primarily for relief of specific performance of agreement dated 21-

10-2011 executed in favour of defendant No.1.         The Apex Court

after looking into the written statement so set up observes that the

relief of specific performance as sought to be raised by defendant

No.2 cannot be set up by way of counterclaim, since the same was

not directed against the plaintiff but instead directed solely against

the co-defendant. In that view, the 2nd defendant therein was held

to be disentitled to raise a prayer of specific performance by way of

a counter claim against the co-defendant.




      9.6. When the present counterclaim is scrutinized through the

prism of ROHIT SINGH and RAJUL MANOJ SHAH, it becomes

evident that the reliefs sought by the 1st defendant in the

counterclaim is not in isolation to counter the plaintiff's claim,

rather it is interwoven with the obligations arising out of a tripartite

agreement and consequent rights asserted by the plaintiff.          The

allegations and the relief are interconnected; they relate to the

                                  43




contractual matrix governing the loan transaction, the construction

agreement and the tripartite agreement, all of which are central to

the plaintiff's suit.   The agreement was between the Bank, the

developer and the home buyer. The developer has sold it to the 3rd

defendant. Now, by way of counterclaim defendant No.1 seeks to

annul the sale deed made in favour of defendant No.3 as null and

void.    In the said counterclaim, the prayer is not restricted to

declaration of sale deed in favour of defendant No.3 as null and

void, but compensation is sought against the plaintiff and defendant

No.2 jointly and severally and declaration of obligations against

defendant No.2 under the agreements to be null and void.



Therefore, the counterclaim does touch upon claim against the

plaintiff and does not entirely relate to the co-defendant.



        9.7. If a suit for specific performance is sought at the hands

of the co-defendant, it would have been an altogether different

circumstance. The prayer is sought against the plaintiff and the co-



defendant in the counterclaim. The concerned Court, at paragraphs

15 and 16, quotes the prayer in the counterclaim. On a bare

perusal of the prayer, it is clear that the counterclaim is not only

                                  44




directed   against   the   co-defendant,   but   is   also   against    the

plaintiff/HDFC Bank as well. Therefore, no fault can be found with

the order so passed by the concerned Court, simply for the reason

that, both in ROHIT SINGH and RAJUL MANOJ SHAH the Apex

Court holds that the counterclaim has to be directed towards the

plaintiff and may incidentally be made against the defendants.



Therefore, I answer the issue holding that generally Order

VIII Rule 6A is a complete bar for a counter claim to be

raised solely against the co-defendant, but if the relief

sought in the counterclaim would touch upon the claim

against the plaintiff as well, it cannot be held to be barred. In

the case at hand, the prayer in the counterclaim of the 1st

defendant clearly indicates several facts against the plaintiff as well.



The commercial Court, while dismissing the applications under


Order VII Rule 11 CPC
, has applied the test correctly.                   As

observed, the counterclaim in its substance and character is

not an isolated claim between defendants inter se.                     It is

inextricably linked to the plaintiff's cause of action and the

composite contractual obligations binding the parties. Upon

such consideration, this Court finds no infirmity in the reasoning of

                                   45




the Commercial Court.        The issue is answered holding that the

counterclaim as framed, is maintainable and does not warrant

rejection under 
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
.



        10. Finding no merit in the petitions, the petitions stand

rejected.



        Interim order, if any subsisting, shall stand dissolved.



                                                    Sd/-

                                             (M.NAGAPRASANNA)
                                                   JUDGE
BKP
CT:MJ
 

