



[Cites 
33
, Cited by 
1034
]




Supreme Court of India


Perkins Eastman Architects Dpc vs Hscc (India) Limited on 26 November, 2019


Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 59, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1568, (2019) 17 SCALE 139, (2019) 4 CURCC 315, (2019) 6 ARBILR 132, (2019) 8 MAD LJ 623, AIR 2020 SC (CIV) 707


Author: 
Uday Umesh Lalit


Bench: 
Indu Malhotra
, 
Uday Umesh Lalit


         Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
         Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd.
                                                                                                            1

                                                                                                    Reportable


                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                                              CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


                                       ARBITRATION APPLICATION NO.32 OF 2019


                         Perkins Eastman Architects
                         DPC & Anr.                                                           …Applicants

                                                              VERSUS

                         HSCC (India) Ltd.                                                    …Respondent



                                                         JUDGMENT



                         Uday Umesh Lalit, J.



                         1.      This application under Section 11(6) read with Section 11(12)(a) of

                         Act1 and under the Scheme2 prays for the following principal relief:



                                    “(a) appoint a sole Arbitrator, in accordance with
                                    clause 24 of the Contract dated 22nd May, 2017
                                    executed between the parties and the sole Arbitrator
                                    so appointed may adjudicate the disputes and
                                    differences between the parties arising from the said
                                    Contract.”

Signature Not Verified


Digitally signed by


MUKESH KUMAR


Date: 2019.11.26


13:14:34 IST


Reason:





                         1 
The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996

                         2 The Appointment of Arbitrators by the Chief   Justice of India Scheme, 1996
Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd.

                                                                                2


     2.     The application has been filed with following assertions: -



     (A)    As an executing agency of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,

     the respondent was desirous of comprehensive architectural planning and

     designing for the works provided under Pradhan Mantri Swasthya

     Suraksha Yojna (PMSSY). Therefore a request for Proposals bearing RFP

     No.HSCC/3-AIIMS/Guntur/2016         was    issued       on   15.07.2016   for

     appointment of Design Consultants for the “comprehensive planning and

     designing, including preparation and development of concepts, master plan

     for the campus, preparation of all preliminary and working drawings for

     various buildings/structures, including preparation of specifications and

     schedule of quantities’ for the proposed All India Institute of Medical

     Sciences at Guntur, Andhra Pradesh”.



     (B)    In response to the RFP, the consortium of the Applicants, namely,


 
(i) Perkins Eastman Architects DPC, an Architectural firm having its

     registered office in New York and (ii) Edifice Consultants Private Limited,

     having its office in Mumbai submitted their bid on 28.09.2016. Letter of

     Intent was issued on 31.11.2017 awarding the project to the Applicants, the

     consideration being Rs.15.63 crores. A letter of award was issued in

     favour of the Applicants on 22.02.2017 and a contract was entered into

     between the Applicants and the respondent on 22.05.2017, which provided

Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                               3


     inter alia for dispute resolution in Clause 24. The relevant portion of said

     Clause was as under:



               “24.0      DISPUTE RESOLUTION

               24.1 Except as otherwise provided in the contract all
               questions and disputes relating to the meaning of the
               specifications, design, drawings and instructions
               herein before mentioned and as to the quality of
               services rendered for the works or as to any other
               question, claim, right, matter or thing whatsoever in
               any way arising out of or relating to the contract,
               design,      drawings,     specifications   estimates
               instructions, orders or these conditions or otherwise
               concerning the works or the execution or failure to
               execute the same whether arising during the progress
               of the work or after the cancellation, termination,
               completion or abandonment thereof thereof shall be
               dealt with as mentioned hereinafter:



 
(i) If the Design Consultant considers any work
               demanded of him to be outside the requirements of
               the contract or disputes on any drawings, record or
               decision given in writing by HSCC on any matter in
               connection with arising out of the contract or carrying
               out of the work, to be unacceptable, he shall promptly
               within 15 days request CGM, HSCC in writing for
               written instruction or decision. There upon, the
               CGM, HSCC shall give his written instructions or
               decision within a period of one month from the
               receipt of the Design Consultant’s letter. If the CGM,
               HSCC fails to give his instructions or decision in
               writing within the aforesaid period or if the Design
               Consultant(s) is dissatisfied with the instructions or
               decision of the CGM, HSCC, the Design
               Consultants(s) may, within 15 days of the receipt of
               decision, appeal to the Director (Engg.) HSCC who
               shall offer an opportunity to the Design Consultant to
               be heard, if the latter so desires, and to offer evidence
               in support of his appeal. The Director (Engg.), HSCC
               shall give his decision within 30 days of receipt of

Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                           4


 
Design Consultant’s appeal. If the Design Consultant
               is dissatisfied with the decision, the Design
               Consultant     shall within a period of 30 days from
               receipt of this decision, give notice to the CMD,
               HSCC for appointment of arbitrator failing which 
the
               said decision
 shall be final, binding and conclusive
               and not referable to adjudication by the arbitrator.




 
(ii) Except where the decision has become final,
               binding and conclusive in terms of sub-Para (i) above
               disputes or difference shall be referred for
               adjudication through arbitration by a sole arbitrator
               appointed by the CMD HSCC within 30 days form
               the receipt of request from the Design Consultant. If
               the arbitrator so appointed is unable or unwilling to
               act or resigns his appointment or vacates his office
               due to any reason, whatsoever another sole arbitrator
               shall be appointed in the manner aforesaid. Such
               person shall be entitled to proceed with the reference
               from the reference from the stage at which it was left
               by his predecessor. It is a term of this contract that
               the party invoking arbitration shall give a list of
               disputes with amounts claimed in respect of each such
               dispute along with the notice for appointment of
               arbitrator and giving reference to the rejection by the
               CMD, HSCC of the appeal. It is also a term of this
               contract that no person other than a person appointed
               by such CMD, HSCC as aforesaid should act as
               arbitrator. It is also a term of the contract that if the
               Design Consultant does not make any demand for
               appointment of arbitrator in respect of any claims in
               writing as aforesaid within 120 days of receiving the
               intimation from HSCC that the final bill is ready for
               payment, the claim of the Design Consultant shall be
               deemed to have been waived and absolutely barred
               and HSCC shall be discharged and released of all
               liabilities under the contract and in respect of these
               claims.      The arbitration shall be conducted in
               accordance with the provisions of the 
Arbitration and
               Conciliation Act, 1996
 (26 of 1996) or any statutory
               modifications or re-enactment thereof and the rules
               made thereunder and for the time being in force shall
               apply to the arbitration proceeding under this clause.”

Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                                 5


     (C)     Within six days of the signing of the said contract, in letter dated

     26.5.2017 the respondent alleged failure on part of the Applicants which

     was followed by stop work notice dated 03.11.2017. It is the case of the

     Applicants that officials of the respondents were deliberately trying to stall

     the project and were non-co-operative right from the initial stages.



     (D)     Later, a termination notice was issued by the respondent on

     11.01.2019 alleging non-compliance of contractual obligations on part of

     the Applicants, which assertions were denied. However, termination letter

     was issued on 20.02.2019. On 11.04.2019 a notice was issued by the

     Advocate for the applicants invoking the dispute resolution Clause namely

     Clause 24 as aforesaid raising a claim of Rs.20.95 crores.



      According to the Applicants, a decision in respect of the notice dated

     11.04.2019 was required to be taken within one month in terms of Clause

     24 of the contract but a communication was sent by the respondent on

     10.05.2019 intimating that a reply to the notice would be sent within 30

     days.



 
(E)     An appeal was filed by the Applicants before the Director

     (Engineering) in terms of said Clause 24 but there was complete failure on

     part of the Director (Engineering) to discharge the obligations in terms of

     said Clause 24. Therefore, by letter dated 28.06.2019 the 
Chief Managing
Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                               6


     Director of the respondent was called upon to appoint a sole arbitrator in

     terms of said Clause 24. However, no appointment of an arbitrator was

     made within thirty days but a letter was addressed by Chief General

     Manager of the respondent on 30.07.2019 purportedly appointing one

     Major General K.T. Gajria as the sole arbitrator.



     (F)         The relevant averments in para 3 of the application are:-



                    “z. The 30 (thirty) day time period for appointment
                   of a sole arbitrator stood expired on 28 th July, 2019
                   and yet the CMD of the respondent failed to appoint a
                   sole arbitrator or even respond to the letter dated 28 th
                   June, 2019 (received on 29th June, 2019).



                   aa. Shockingly, in continuance of its highhanded
                   approach and in contravention to its own letter dated
                   24th June, 2019, the CGM of the Respondent
                   addressed the Purported Appointment Letter dated
                   30th July, 2019 to one Major General K.T. Gajria
                   thereby purportedly appointing him as a sole
                   arbitrator in the matter. On the same date, the CGM
                   of the Respondent also addressed a letter to the
                   Applicants inter alia informing about the purported
                   appointment of Mr. Gajria”



     3.          In the aforesaid premises the Applicants submit:-

           (a)     The Applicants had duly invoked the arbitration clause;



           (b)     The Chairman and Managing Director was the competent

           authority to appoint a sole arbitrator;



           (c)     But the Chief General Manager of the respondent wrongfully

           appointed the sole arbitrator;



           (d)     Such appointment was beyond the period prescribed;

 
Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                                  7


          (e) In any case, an independent and impartial arbitrator is required to

          be appointed.



     4.         In response to the application, an affidavit-in-reply has been filed

     by the respondent denying all material allegations. It is accepted that the

     contract entered into between the parties contains Clause 24 regarding

     dispute resolution. It is, however, disputed that there was any inaction on

     part of the respondent in discharging their obligations in terms of Clause


     24. It is submitted, inter alia, that


          (a)     The appointment of Major General K.T. Gajria was in

          consonance with Clause 24 of the contract;



          (b)     Such appointment could not in any way be said to be illegal;



          (c)     There was no occasion to file an application seeking

          appointment of any other person under the provisions of Section 11(6)

          read with Section 11(12)(a) of the Act; and


          (d) In any case, the arbitration in the present matter would not be an

          International Commercial Arbitration within the meaning of 
Section

          2(1)(f)
 of the Act.



 
5.         We heard Mr. Amar Dave, learned Advocate for the Applicants and

     Mr. Guru Krishna Kumar, learned Senior Advocate for the respondent.

Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                               8


           It was submitted by Mr. Dave, learned Advocate that on account of

     failure on part of the respondent in discharging its obligations in terms of

     Clause 24, the applicants would be entitled to maintain the present

     Application and seek appointment of an arbitrator as prayed for. It was

     further submitted that the appointment process contemplated in Clause 24

     gave complete discretion to the Chairman and Managing Director of the

     respondent to make an appointment of an arbitrator of his choice, the

     Chairman and Managing Director of the respondent would naturally be

     interested in the outcome or decision in respect of the dispute, the pre-



     requisite of element of impartiality would, therefore, be conspicuously

     absent in such process; and as such it would be desirable that this Court

     makes an appropriate appointment of an arbitrator. Reliance was placed on

     the decisions of this Court in Walter Bau AG, Legal Successor of the

     Original Contractor, Dyckerhoff and Widmann, A.G. v. Municipal

     Corporation of Greater Mumbai and another 3 and TRF Limited v.



 
Energo Engineering Projects Limited4 in support of the submissions. Mr.

     Dave, learned Advocate also relied upon the decision of this Court in

     
Larsen and Toubro Limited SCOMI Engineering BHD v. Mumbai

     Metropolitan Region Development Authority5
 to bring home the point that



     3 (
2015)   3 SCC 800
     4 (2017)   8 SCC 377
     5 (2019)   2 SCC 271
Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                               9


     the arbitration in the present matter would be an International Commercial

     Arbitration.



            Mr. Guru Krishna Kumar, learned Senior Advocate appearing for

     the respondent submitted that no case was made out to maintain the instant

     application. He submitted that two basic submissions were raised in para 3

     in sub-para (z) and (aa) of the application that the Chairman and Managing

     Director failed to appoint the sole arbitrator within 30 days of the

     requisition dated 28.06.2019 and that it was the Chief General Manager of

     the respondent who purportedly made the appointment of a sole arbitrator

     on 30.07.2019. The infirmities thus projected were on two counts, namely,

     for over-stepping the limit of 30 days; and secondly the appointment was

     not made by the Chairman and Managing Director of the respondent. He

     pointed out that the period in terms of requisition dated 28.06.2019 expired

     on Friday and the appointment was made on the first available working

     day. Secondly, the appointment was actually made by the Chairman and

     Managing Director but was conveyed by the Chief General Manager, and

     as such the alleged infirmities were completely non-existent. He further

     submitted that arbitration, if any, in the instant matter would not be an

     International Commercial Arbitration.



 
6.     The present application, therefore, raises two basic issues; first

     whether the arbitration in the present case would be an 
International
Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                            10


     Commercial Arbitration or not. In case, it is not, then this Court cannot

     deal with the application under 
Section 11(6)
 read with 
Section 11(12)(a)


     of the Act. The second issue is whether a case is made out for exercise of

     power by the Court to make an appointment of an arbitrator.



     7.     During the course of hearing, reliance was placed by the Applicants

     on the Consortium Agreement entered into between the Applicant No.1 and

     the Applicant No.2 on 20.09.2016 which described the Applicant No.1 as

     the lead member of the Consortium. The relevant recital and the Clause of

     the Agreement were as under:



               “1. WHEREAS all the Parties agree that Perkins
               Eastman will be the focal point for the agreement and
               interaction with the client.”

               “9. Perkins Eastman and M/s. Edifice Consultants are
               jointly and severally responsible for the execution of
               the project”


            In terms of requirements of the bid documents and RFP a

      “Declaration for Lead Member of the Consortium (Form E)” was also

      submitted. The declaration was as under:



               “WHEREAS M/s. HSCC (India) Ltd. (HSCC) (the
               Client) has invited Bids/Bids from the interested
               parties for providing Comprehensive Planning and
               Designing of the Proposed All India Institute of
               Medical Sciences at Mangalagiri, Guntur (AP).



 
AND WHEREAS, the members of the Consortium
               are interested in bidding for the Project and
               implementing the Project in accordance with the

Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                               11


               terms and conditions of the Request for Bid (RFP)
               document, Terms of Reference, Client’s Requirement,
               Notice Inviting Bid, Instructions to Bidders,
               Conditions of Contract and other connected
               documents in respect of the Project, and

               AND WHEREAS, it is necessary under the RFP
               document for the members of the Consortium Bidder
               to designate one of them as the Lead Manager with all
               necessary power and authority to do for and on behalf
               of the Consortium bidder, all acts, deeds and things as
               may be necessary in connection with the Consortium
               Bidder’s proposal for the Project.



               NOW THIS DECLARATION WITNESSETH THAT;

               We, Perkins Eastman Architects DPC, and having its
               registered office at 115 5th Ave Floor 3, New York,
               NY 10003-10004, USA and M/s. Edifice Consultants
               Private Limited having its registered office at Srirams
               Arcade, 3rd Floor, Opp. Govandi P.O., Off Govandi
               Station Road, Govandi East, Mumbai, Maharashtra
               400088 do hereby designate Perkins Eastman
               Architects DPC being one of the members of the
               Consortium, as the Lead Member of the Consortium,
               to do on behalf of the Consortium, all or any of the
               acts, deeds of things necessary or incidental to the
               Consortium’s Application/Bid for the Project,
               including submission of Application/Bid, participating
               in conferences, responding to queries, submission of
               information/documents and generally to represent the
               Consortium in all its dealings with HSCC, any other
               Government Agency or any person, in connection
               with the Project until culmination of the process of
               bidding and thereafter till the completion of the
               Contract.”



 
8.     It is not disputed by the respondent that it was a requisite condition

     to declare a lead member of the Consortium and that by aforesaid

     declaration the applicant No.1 was shown to be the lead member of the

Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                              12


     Consortium. The reliance is however placed by the respondent on Clause

     9 of the Consortium Agreement by virtue of which both the Applicants

     would be jointly and severely responsible for the execution of the project.



     It is clear that the declaration shows that the Applicant No.1 was accepted

     to be the lead member of the Consortium. Even if the liability of both the

     Applicants was stated in Clause 9 to be joint and several, that by itself

     would not change the status of the Applicant No.1 to be the lead member.



     We shall, therefore, proceed on the premise that Applicant No.1 is the lead

     member of the Consortium.



     9.     In Larsen and Toubro Limited SCOMI Engineering BHD 5 more

     or less similar fact situation came up for consideration.          The only

     distinction was that the lead member in the consortium was an entity

     registered in India. Paragraphs 2, 3, 4, 15, 17, 18 and 19 of the decision

     are as under:



               “2. Since disputes arose between the parties to the
               agreement, various interim claims had been made by
               the Consortium of M/s Larsen and Toubro, an Indian
               company, together with Scomi Engineering Bhd, a
               company incorporated in Malaysia, for which the
               Consortium has filed this petition under 
Section 11
 of
               the Act to this Court, since according to them, one of
               the parties to the arbitration agreement, being a body
               corporate, incorporated in Malaysia, would be a body
               corporate, which is incorporated in a country other
               than India, which would attract 
Section 2(1)(f)(ii)
 of
               the Act.

 
Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                           13


               3. Shri Gopal Jain, learned Senior Counsel appearing
               on behalf of the Consortium, has taken us through the
               agreement, in which he strongly relies upon the fact
               that the two entities, that is, the Indian company and
               the Malaysian company, though stated to be a
               Consortium, are jointly and severally liable, to the
               employer. The learned Senior Counsel has also relied
               upon the fact that throughout the working of the
               contract, separate claims have been made, which have
               been rejected by the Mumbai Metropolitan Region
               Development Authority (hereinafter referred to as
               “MMRDA”). He has also further relied upon the fact
               that by at least three letters, during the working of the
               agreement, the claims have in fact been rejected
               altogether and that, therefore, there is no impediment
               in invoking the arbitration Clause under 
Section 20
.4
               of the general conditions of contract (hereinafter
               referred to as “GCC”), as the procedure outlined by
               Clauses 20.1 to 20.3 had already been exhausted.



               4. On the other hand, Mr Shyam Divan, learned
               Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of MMRDA, the
               respondent, has relied upon both the contract dated 9-

               1-2009 as well as the actual consortium agreement
               dated 4-6-2008 between the Indian company and the
               Malaysian company, which, when read together,
               would show that they are really an unincorporated
               association and would, therefore, fall within 
Section
               2(1)(f)(iii)
 as being an association or a body of
               individuals, provided the central management and
               control is exercised in any country other than India.

                                    … … …

               15. 
Section 2(1)(f)(iii)
 of the Act refers to two
               different sets of persons: an “association” as distinct
               and separate from a “body of individuals”. For
               example, under 
Section 2(31)
 of the Income Tax Act,
               1961, “person” is defined as including, under sub-
               clause (v), an association of persons, or body of
               individuals, whether incorporated or not. It is in this
               sense, that an association is referred to in 
Section 2(1)


               (f)(iii) which would therefore include a consortium
               consisting of two or more bodies corporate, at least
               one of whom is a body corporate incorporated in a
               country other than India.

 
… … …

Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                            14


                  17. Law Commission Report No. 246 of August 2014,
                  which made several amendments to the 
Arbitration
                  and Conciliation Act, 1996
, gave the following reason
                  for deleting the words “a company or”:

                       “(iii) In sub-section (1), clause (f), sub-clause

                       (iii), delete the words “a company or” before the
                       words “an association or a body of individuals”.



                      [Note.—The reference to “a company” in sub-

 
section (iii) has been removed since the same is
                      already covered under sub-section (ii). The
                      intention is to determine the residence of a
                      company based on its place of incorporation and
                      not the place of central management/control. This
                      further re-enforces the “place of incorporation”
                      principle 
laid down by
 the Supreme Court in
                      
TDM Infrastructure (P) Ltd. v. UE Development
                      India (P) Ltd.6
, and adds greater certainty in case
                      of companies having a different place of
                      incorporation and place of exercise of central
                      management and control.]”

                  It would become clear that prior to the deletion of the
                  expression “a company or”, there were three sets of
                  persons referred to in 
Section 2(1)(f)(iii)
 as separate
                  and distinct persons who would fall within the said
                  sub-clause. This does not change due to the deletion
                  of the phrase “a company or” for the reason given by
                  the Law Commission. This is another reason as to
                  why “an association” cannot be read with “body of
                  individuals” which follows it but is a separate and
                  distinct category by itself, as is understood from the
                  definition of “person” as defined in the 
Income Tax
                  Act
 
referred to above
.




 
18. This being the case, coupled with the fact, as
                  correctly argued by Shri Divan, that the Indian
                  company is the lead partner, and that the Supervisory
                  Board constituted under the consortium agreement
                  makes it clear that the lead partner really has the
                  determining voice in that it appoints the Chairman of
                  the said Board (undoubtedly, with the consent of other
                  members); and the fact that the Consortium’s office is

     6 (
2008)   14 SCC 271
Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                               15


                   in Wadala, Mumbai as also that the lead member shall
                   lead the arbitration proceedings, would all point to the
                   fact that the central management and control of this
                   Consortium appears to be exercised in India and not
                   in any foreign nation.



                   19. This being the case, we dismiss the petition filed
                   under 
Section 11
 of the Act, as there is no
                   “international commercial arbitration” as defined
                   under 
Section 2(1)(f)
 of the Act for the petitioner to
                   come to this Court. We also do not deem it necessary
                   to go into whether the appropriate stage for invoking
                   arbitration has yet been reached.”



     10.     It was thus held that “Association” and “Body of individuals”

     referred to in 
Section 2(1)(f)
 of the Act would be separate categories.



     However, the lead member of the Association 
in that case
 being an Indian

     entity, the “Central Management and Control” of the Association was held

     to be in a country other than India. Relying on said decision we conclude

     that the lead member of the Consortium company i.e. Applicant No.1 being

     an Architectural Firm having its registered office in New York,

     requirements of 
Section 2(1)(f)
 of the Act are satisfied and the arbitration

     in the present case would be an “International Commercial Arbitration”.



     11.     That takes us to the second issue, namely, whether a case has been

     made out for exercise of power by the Court for an appointment of an

     arbitrator.

 
Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                              16


     12.    The communication invoking arbitration in terms of Clause 24 was

     sent by the Applicants on 28.06.2019 and the period within which the

     respondent was to make the necessary appointment expired on 28.07.2019.



     The next day was a working day but the appointment was made on

     Tuesday, the 30th July, 2019. Technically, the appointment was not within

     the time stipulated but such delay on part of the respondent could not be

     said to be an infraction of such magnitude that exercise of power by the

     Court under 
Section 11
 of the Act merely on that ground is called for.



     13.    However, the point that has been urged, relying upon the decision

     of this Court in Walter Bau AG3 and TRF Limited4, requires consideration.



     In the present case Clause 24 empowers the Chairman and Managing

     Director of the respondent to make the appointment of a sole arbitrator and

     said Clause also stipulates that no person other than a person appointed by

     such Chairman and Managing Director of the respondent would act as an

     arbitrator. In TRF Limited4 , a Bench of three Judges of this Court, was

     called upon to consider whether the appointment of an arbitrator made by

     the Managing Director of the respondent therein was a valid one and

     whether at that stage an application moved under 
Section 11(6)
 of the Act

     could be entertained by the Court. The relevant Clause, namely, Clause 33

     which provided for resolution of disputes 
in that case
 was under:

 
Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                              17


               “33. Resolution of dispute/arbitration

                   (a) In case any disagreement or dispute arises
                       between the buyer and the seller under or in
                       connection with the PO, both shall make
                       every effort to resolve it amicably by direct
                       informal negotiation.

                   (b) If, even after 30 days from the
                       commencement of such informal negotiation,
                       seller and the buyer have not been able to
                       resolve the dispute amicably, either party may
                       require that the dispute be referred for
                       resolution to the formal mechanism of
                       arbitration.

                   (c) All disputes which cannot be settled by
                       mutual negotiation shall be referred to and
                       determined by arbitration as per the
                       
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
 as
                       amended.

                   (d) Unless otherwise provided, any dispute or
                       difference between the parties in connection
                       with this agreement shall be referred to sole
                       arbitration of the Managing Director of buyer
                       or his nominee. Venue of arbitration shall be
                       Delhi, and the arbitration shall be conducted
                       in English language.

                   (e) The award of the Tribunal shall be final and
                       binding on both, buyer and seller.”



 
14.    In TRF Limited4, the Agreement was entered into before the

     provisions of the 
Amending Act
 (Act No.3 of 2016) came into force. It

     was submitted by the appellant that by virtue of the provisions of the

     
Amending Act
 and insertion of the Fifth and Seventh Schedules in the Act,

     the Managing Director of the respondent would be a person having direct

     interest in the dispute and as such could not act as an arbitrator. The

     extension of the submission was that a person who himself was

     disqualified and disentitled could also not nominate any other person to act

Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                          18


     as an arbitrator. The submission countered by the respondent therein was

     as under: -



               “7.1. The submission to the effect that since the
               Managing Director of the respondent has become
               ineligible to act as an arbitrator subsequent to the
               amendment in the Act, he could also not have
               nominated any other person as arbitrator is absolutely
               unsustainable, for the Fifth and the Seventh Schedules
               fundamentally guide in determining whether
               circumstances exist which give rise to justifiable
               doubts as to the independence and impartiality of the
               arbitrator. To elaborate, if any person whose
               relationship with the parties or the counsel or the
               subject-matter of dispute falls under any of the
               categories specified in the Seventh Schedule, he is
               ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator but not
               otherwise.



      The issue was discussed and decided by this Court as under:-



 
50. First, we shall deal with Clause (d). There is no
               quarrel that by virtue of 
Section 12(5)
 of the Act, if
               any person who falls under any of the categories
               specified in the Seventh Schedule shall be ineligible
               to be appointed as the arbitrator. There is no doubt
               and cannot be, for the language employed in the
               Seventh Schedule, the Managing Director of the
               Corporation has become ineligible by operation of
               law. It is the stand of the learned Senior Counsel for
               the appellant that once the Managing Director
               becomes ineligible, he also becomes ineligible to
               nominate. Refuting the said stand, it is canvassed by
               the learned Senior Counsel for the respondent that the
               ineligibility cannot extend to a nominee if he is not
               from the Corporation and more so when there is
               apposite and requisite disclosure. We think it
               appropriate to make it clear that in the case at hand we
               are neither concerned with the disclosure nor
               objectivity nor impartiality nor any such other
               circumstance. We are singularly concerned with the
               issue, whether the Managing Director, after becoming
               ineligible by operation of law, is he still eligible to

Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                            19


                nominate an arbitrator. At the cost of repetition, we
                may state that when there are two parties, one may
                nominate an arbitrator and the other may appoint
                another. That is altogether a different situation. If
                there is a clause requiring the parties to nominate their
                respective arbitrator, their authority to nominate
                cannot be questioned. What really in that
                circumstance can be called in question is the
                procedural compliance and the eligibility of their
                arbitrator depending upon the norms provided under
                the Act and the Schedules appended thereto. But, here
                is a case where the Managing Director is the “named
                sole arbitrator” and he has also been conferred with
                the power to nominate one who can be the arbitrator
                in his place. Thus, there is subtle distinction. 
In this
                regard, our attention has been drawn to a two-Judge
                Bench decision in 
State of Orissa v. Commr. of Land
                Records & Settlement7
. In the said case, the question
                arose, can the Board of Revenue revise the order
                passed by its delegate. Dwelling upon the said
                proposition, the Court held: (SCC p. 173, para 25)
                      “25. We have to note that the Commissioner
                      when he exercises power of the Board delegated
                      to him under 
Section 33
 of the Settlement Act,
                      1958, the order passed by him is to be treated as
                      an order of the Board of Revenue and not as that
                      of the Commissioner in his capacity as
                      Commissioner. This position is clear from two
                      rulings of this Court to which we shall presently
                      refer.
 
The first of the said rulings is the one
                      decided by the Constitution Bench of this Court
                      in 
Roop Chand v. State of Punjab8
. In that case,
                      it was held by the majority that where the State
                      Government had, under 
Section 41(1)
 of the
                      East Punjab Holdings (Consolidation and
                      Prevention of Fragmentation) Act, 1948,
                      delegated its appellate powers vested in it under
                      
Section 21(4)
 to an “officer”, an order passed by
                      such an officer was an order passed by the State
                      Government itself and “not an order passed by
                      any officer under this Act” within 
Section 42
 and
                      was not revisable by the State Government.
 
It
                      was pointed out that for the purpose of exercise
     7   (
1998) 7 SCC 162
     8   AIR 1963 SC 1503
Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                                 20


                      of powers of revision by the State under 
Section
                      42
 of that Act, the order sought to be revised
                      must be an order passed by an officer in his own
                      right and not as a delegate of the State. The
                      State Government was, therefore, not entitled
                      under 
Section 42
 to call for the records of the
                      case which was disposed of by an officer acting
                      as its delegate.”
                                                 (emphasis in original)



 
51. Be it noted in the said case, reference was made to
                
Behari Kunj Sahkari Awas Samiti v. State of U.P.9
,
                which followed the decision in 
Roop Chand v. State
                of Punjab8
. It is seemly to note here that the said
                principle has been followed in Indore Vikas
                Pradhikaran10.




                52. Mr Sundaram has strongly relied on Pratapchand
                Nopaji11. In the said case, the three-Judge Bench
                applied the maxim “qui facit per alium facit per se”.
                We may profitably reproduce the passage: (SCC p.
                214, para 9)
                     “9. … The principle which would apply, if the
                     objects are struck by 
Section 23
 of the Contract
                     Act, is embodied in the maxim: “qui facit per
                     alium facit per se” (what one does through
                     another is done by oneself). To put it in another
                     form, that which cannot be done directly may
                     not be done indirectly by engaging another
                     outside the prohibited area to do the illegal act
                     within the prohibited area. It is immaterial
                     whether, for the doing of such an illegal act, the
                     agent employed is given the wider powers or
                     authority of the “pucca adatia”, or, as the High
                     Court had held, he is clothed with the powers of
                     an ordinary commission agent only.”


 
53. The aforesaid authorities have been commended
                to us to establish the proposition that if the

     9 (1997) 7 SCC 37
     10 Indore Vikas Pradhikaran   v. Pure Industrial Coke & Chemicals Ltd.,
          (
2007) 8 SCC 705
     11   Pratapchand Nopaji v. Kotrike Venkata Setty & Sons
, (
1975) 2 SCC 208
Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                              21


               nomination of an arbitrator by an ineligible arbitrator
               is allowed, it would tantamount to carrying on the
               proceeding of arbitration by himself. According to the
               learned counsel for the appellant, ineligibility strikes
               at the root of his power to arbitrate or get it arbitrated
               upon by a nominee.



               54. In such a context, the fulcrum of the controversy
               would be, can an ineligible arbitrator, like the
               Managing Director, nominate an arbitrator, who may
               be otherwise eligible and a respectable person. As
               stated earlier, we are neither concerned with the
               objectivity nor the individual respectability. We are
               only concerned with the authority or the power of the
               Managing Director. By our analysis, we are obligated
               to arrive at the conclusion that once the arbitrator has
               become ineligible by operation of law, he cannot
               nominate another as an arbitrator. The arbitrator
               becomes ineligible as per prescription contained in
               
Section 12(5)
 of the Act. It is inconceivable in law
               that person who is statutorily ineligible can nominate
               a person. Needless to say, once the infrastructure
               collapses, the superstructure is bound to collapse. One
               cannot have a building without the plinth. Or to put it
               differently, once the identity of the Managing Director
               as the sole arbitrator is lost, the power to nominate
               someone else as an arbitrator is obliterated. Therefore,
               the view expressed by the High Court is not
               sustainable and we say so.”



 
15.    It was thus held that as the Managing Director became ineligible by

     operation of law to act as an arbitrator, he could not nominate another

     person to act as an arbitrator and that once the identity of the Managing

     Director as the sole arbitrator was lost, the power to nominate someone

     else as an arbitrator was also obliterated. The relevant Clause in said case

     had nominated the Managing Director himself to be the sole arbitrator and

     also empowered said Managing Director to nominate another person to act

Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                                22


     as an arbitrator. The Managing Director thus had two capacities under said

     Clause, the first as an arbitrator and the second as an appointing authority.



     In the present case we are concerned with only one capacity of the

     Chairman and Managing Director and that is as an appointing authority.



 
We thus have two categories of cases. The first, similar to the one

     dealt with in TRF Limited4 where the Managing Director himself is named

     as an arbitrator with an additional power to appoint any other person as an

     arbitrator. In the second category, the Managing Director is not to act as an

     arbitrator himself but is empowered or authorised to appoint any other

     person of his choice or discretion as an arbitrator. If, in the first category

     of cases, the Managing Director was found incompetent, it was because of

     the interest that he would be said to be having in the outcome or result of

     the dispute. The element of invalidity would thus be directly relatable to

     and arise from the interest that he would be having in such outcome or

     decision. If that be the test, similar invalidity would always arise and

     spring even in the second category of cases. If the interest that he has in

     the outcome of the dispute, is taken to be the basis for the possibility of

     bias, it will always be present irrespective of whether the matter stands

     under the first or second category of cases. We are conscious that if such

     deduction is drawn from the decision of this Court in TRF Limited4, all

     cases having clauses similar to that with which we are presently concerned,

Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                                 23


     a party to the agreement would be disentitled to make any appointment of

     an Arbitrator on its own and it would always be available to argue that a

     party or an official or an authority having interest in the dispute would be

     disentitled to make appointment of an Arbitrator.



 
16.     But, in our view that has to be the logical deduction from TRF

     Limited4.   Paragraph 50 of the decision shows that this Court was

     concerned with the issue, “whether the Managing Director, after becoming

     ineligible by operation of law, is he still eligible to nominate an Arbitrator”

     The ineligibility referred to therein, was as a result of operation of law, in

     that a person having an interest in the dispute or in the outcome or decision

     thereof, must not only be ineligible to act as an arbitrator but must also not

     be eligible to appoint anyone else as an arbitrator and that such person

     cannot and should not have any role in charting out any course to the

     dispute resolution by having the power to appoint an arbitrator. The next

     sentences in the paragraph, further show that cases where both the parties

     could nominate respective arbitrators of their choice were found to be

     completely a different situation.      The reason is clear that whatever

     advantage a party may derive by nominating an arbitrator of its choice

     would get counter balanced by equal power with the other party. But, in a

     case where only one party has a right to appoint a sole arbitrator, its choice

     will always have an element of exclusivity in determining or charting the

Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                               24


     course for dispute resolution. Naturally, the person who has an interest in

     the outcome or decision of the dispute must not have the power to appoint

     a sole arbitrator. That has to be taken as the essence of the amendments

     brought in by the 
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015


     (Act 3 of 2016) and recognised by the decision of this Court in TRF

     Limited4.



 
17.       We must also at this stage refer to the following observations made

     by this Court in para 48 of its decision in 
Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd. v. Raja

     Transport (P) Ltd.12
, which were in the context that was obtaining before

     Act 3 of 2016 had come into force: -




                 “48. In the light of the above discussion, the scope of
                 
Section 11
 of the Act containing the scheme of
                 appointment of arbitrators may be summarised thus:



                 (i) Where the agreement provides for arbitration with
                 three arbitrators (each party to appoint one arbitrator
                 and the two appointed arbitrators to appoint a third
                 arbitrator), in the event of a party failing to appoint an
                 arbitrator within 30 days from the receipt of a request
                 from the other party (or the two nominated arbitrators
                 failing to agree on the third arbitrator within 30 days
                 from the date of the appointment), the Chief Justice or
                 his designate will exercise power under sub-section
                 (4) of 
Section 11
 of the Act.



 
(ii) Where the agreement provides for arbitration by a
                 sole arbitrator and the parties have not agreed upon
                 any appointment procedure, the Chief Justice or his
                 designate will exercise power under sub-section (5) of
                 
Section 11
, if the parties fail to agree on the

     12   (
2009) 8 SCC 520
Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                          25


               arbitration within thirty days from the receipt of a
               request by a party from the other party.



               (iii) Where the arbitration agreement specifies the
               appointment procedure, then irrespective of whether
               the arbitration is by a sole arbitrator or by a three-
               member Tribunal, the Chief Justice or his designate
               will exercise power under sub-section (6) of 
Section
               11
, if a party fails to act as required under the agreed
               procedure (or the parties or the two appointed
               arbitrators fail to reach an agreement expected of
               them under the agreed procedure or any
               person/institution fails to perform any function
               entrusted to him/it under that procedure).



               (iv) While failure of the other party to act within 30
               days will furnish a cause of action to the party seeking
               arbitration to approach the Chief Justice or his
               designate in cases falling under sub-sections (4) and
               (5), such a time-bound requirement is not found in
               sub-section (6) of 
Section 11
. The failure to act as per
               the agreed procedure within the time-limit prescribed
               by the arbitration agreement, or in the absence of any
               prescribed time-limit, within a reasonable time, will
               enable the aggrieved party to file a petition under
               
Section 11(6)
 of the Act.



               (v) Where the appointment procedure has been agreed
               between the parties, but the cause of action for
               invoking the jurisdiction of the Chief Justice or his
               designate under clauses (a), (b) or (c) of sub-section
               (6) has not arisen, then the question of the Chief
               Justice or his designate exercising power under sub-
               section (6) does not arise. The condition precedent for
               approaching the Chief Justice or his designate for
               taking necessary measures under sub-section (6) is
               that


                   (i) a party failing to act as required under the
                   agreed appointment procedure; or

 
(ii) the parties (or the two appointed arbitrators)
                   failing to reach an agreement expected of them
                   under the agreed appointment procedure; or

Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                                26


                     (iii) a person/institution who has been entrusted
                     with any function under the agreed appointment
                     procedure, failing to perform such function.



                 (vi) The Chief Justice or his designate while
                 exercising power under sub-section (6) of 
Section 11

                 shall endeavour to give effect to the appointment
                 procedure prescribed in the arbitration clause.



                 (vii) If circumstances exist, giving rise to justifiable
                 doubts as to the independence and impartiality of the
                 person nominated, or if other circumstances warrant
                 appointment of an independent arbitrator by ignoring
                 the procedure prescribed, the Chief Justice or his
                 designate may, for reasons to be recorded ignore the
                 designated arbitrator and appoint someone else.”



     18.       Sub para (vii) of aforesaid paragraph 48 lays down that if there are

     justifiable doubts as to the independence and impartiality of the person

     nominated, and if other circumstances warrant appointment of an

     independent arbitrator by ignoring the procedure prescribed, such

     appointment can be made by the Court. It may also be noted that on the

     issue of necessity and desirability of impartial and independent arbitrators

     the matter was considered by the Law Commission in its report No.246.



     Paragraphs 53 to 60 under the heading “Neutrality of Arbitrators” are

     quoted in the Judgment of this Court in Voestapline Schienen Gmbh v.



 
Delhi Metro Rail Corpn. Ltd.13, while paras 59 and 60 of the report stand

     extracted in the decision of this Court in 
Bharat Broadband Network



     13   (2017) 4 SCC 665
Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                             27


 
Limited v. United Telecoms Limited14
. For the present purposes, we may

     rely on paragraph 57, which is to the following effect:-




                 “57. The balance between procedural fairness and
                 binding nature of these contracts, appears to have
                 been tilted in favour of the latter by the Supreme
                 Court, and the Commission believes the present
                 position of law is far from satisfactory. Since the
                 principles of impartiality and independence cannot be
                 discarded at any stage of the proceedings, specifically
                 at the stage of constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal, it
                 would be incongruous to say that party autonomy can
                 be exercised in complete disregard of these principles
                 — even if the same has been agreed prior to the
                 disputes having arisen between the parties. There are
                 certain minimum levels of independence and
                 impartiality that should be required of the arbitral
                 process regardless of the parties’ apparent agreement.
                 A sensible law cannot, for instance, permit
                 appointment of an arbitrator who is himself a party to
                 the dispute, or who is employed by (or similarly
                 dependent on) one party, even if this is what the
                 parties agreed. The Commission hastens to add that
                 Mr P.K. Malhotra, the ex officio member of the Law
                 Commission suggested having an exception for the
                 State, and allow State parties to appoint employee
                 arbitrators. The Commission is of the opinion that, on
                 this issue, there cannot be any distinction between
                 State and non-State parties. The concept of party
                 autonomy cannot be stretched to a point where it
                 negates the very basis of having impartial and
                 independent adjudicators for resolution of disputes. In
                 fact, when the party appointing an adjudicator is the
                 State, the duty to appoint an impartial and
                 independent adjudicator is that much more onerous
                 — and the right to natural justice cannot be said to
                 have been waived only on the basis of a “prior”
                 agreement between the parties at the time of the
                 contract and before arising of the disputes.”





 
14   (
2019) 5 SCC 755
Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                             28


     19.      In Voestalpine3, this Court dealt with independence and

     impartiality of the arbitrator as under:



                 “20. Independence and impartiality of the arbitrator
                 are the hallmarks of any arbitration proceedings. Rule
                 against bias is one of the fundamental principles of
                 natural justice which applied to all judicial and quasi-
                 judicial proceedings. It is for this reason that
                 notwithstanding the fact that relationship between the
                 parties to the arbitration and the arbitrators themselves
                 are contractual in nature and the source of an
                 arbitrator’s appointment is deduced from the
                 agreement entered into between the parties,
                 notwithstanding the same non-independence and non-
                 impartiality of such arbitrator (though contractually
                 agreed upon) would render him ineligible to conduct
                 the arbitration. The genesis behind this rational is that
                 even when an arbitrator is appointed in terms of
                 contract and by the parties to the contract, he is
                 independent of the parties. Functions and duties
                 require him to rise above the partisan interest of the
                 parties and not to act in, or so as to further, the
                 particular interest of either parties. After all, the
                 arbitrator has adjudicatory role to perform and,
                 therefore, he must be independent of parties as well as
                 impartial. The United Kingdom Supreme Court has
                 beautifully highlighted this aspect in Hashwani v.
                 Jivraj15 in the following words: (WLR p. 1889, para

 
45)

                      “45. … the dominant purpose of appointing an
                      arbitrator or arbitrators is the impartial
                      resolution of the dispute between the parties in
                      accordance with the terms of the agreement and,
                      although the contract between the parties and the
                      arbitrators would be a contract for the provision
                      of personal services, they were not personal
                      services under the direction of the parties.”




     15   (2011) 1 WLR 1872; 2011 
UKSC 40
Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                            29


               21. Similarly, Cour de Cassation, France, in a
               judgment delivered in 1972 in Consorts Ury,
               underlined that:

               “an independent mind is indispensable in the exercise
               of judicial power, whatever the source of that power
               may be, and it is one of the essential qualities of an
               arbitrator.”


               22. Independence and impartiality are two different
               concepts. An arbitrator may be independent and yet,
               lack impartiality, or vice versa. Impartiality, as is well
               accepted, is a more subjective concept as compared to
               independence. Independence, which is more an
               objective     concept,     may,     thus,    be      more
               straightforwardly ascertained by the parties at the
               outset of the arbitration proceedings in light of the
               circumstances disclosed by the arbitrator, while
               partiality will more likely surface during the
               arbitration proceedings.

                                ……. …..           ……

 
30. Time has come to send positive signals to the
               international business community, in order to create
               healthy arbitration environment and conducive
               arbitration culture in this country. Further, as
               highlighted by the Law Commission also in its report,
               duty becomes more onerous in government contracts,
               where one of the parties to the dispute is the
               Government or public sector undertaking itself and
               the authority to appoint the arbitrator rests with it. In
               the instant case also, though choice is given by
               DMRC to the opposite party but it is limited to choose
               an arbitrator from the panel prepared by DMRC. It,
               therefore, becomes imperative to have a much
               broadbased panel, so that there is no misapprehension
               that principle of impartiality and independence would
               be discarded at any stage of the proceedings, specially
               at the stage of constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal.
               We, therefore, direct that DMRC shall prepare a
               broadbased panel on the aforesaid lines, within a
               period of two months from today.”

Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                              30


     20.       In the light of the aforestated principles, the report of the Law

     Commission and the decision in Voestapline Schienen Gmbh13, the

     imperatives of creating healthy arbitration environment demand that the

     instant application deserves acceptance.



     21.       The further question that arises is whether the power can be

     exercised by this Court under 
Section 11
 of the Act when the appointment

     of an arbitrator has already been made by the respondent and whether the

     appellant should be left to raise challenge at an appropriate stage in terms

     of remedies available in law. Similar controversy was gone into by a

     Designated Judge of this Court in Walter Bau AG3 and the discussion on

     the point was as under:-



                 “9. While it is correct that in Antrix16 and Pricol
                 Ltd.17, it was opined by this Court that after
                 appointment of an arbitrator is made, the remedy of
                 the aggrieved party is not under 
Section 11(6)
 but
                 such remedy lies elsewhere and under different
                 provisions of the 
Arbitration Act
 (
Sections 12
 and 
13
),
                 the context in which the aforesaid view was expressed
                 cannot be lost sight of. In Antrix16, appointment of the
                 arbitrator, as per the ICC Rules, was as per the
                 alternative procedure agreed upon, whereas in Pricol
                 Ltd.17., the party which had filed the application under
                 
Section 11(6)
 of the Arbitration Act had already
                 submitted to the jurisdiction of the arbitrator. In the
                 present case, the situation is otherwise.



 
10. Unless the appointment of the arbitrator is ex facie
                 valid and such appointment satisfies the Court

     16   (
2014) 11 SCC 560
17          (2015) 4 SCC 177
Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                            31


 
exercising jurisdiction under 
Section 11(6)
 of the
                 Arbitration Act, acceptance of such appointment as a
                 fait accompli to debar the jurisdiction under 
Section
                 11(6)
 cannot be countenanced in law. In the present
                 case, the agreed upon procedure between the parties
                 contemplated the appointment of the arbitrator by the
                 second party within 30 days of receipt of a notice
                 from the first party. While the decision in Datar
                 Switchgears Ltd.18 may have introduced some
                 flexibility in the time frame agreed upon by the
                 parties by extending it till a point of time anterior to
                 the filing of the application under 
Section 11(6)
 of the
                 Arbitration Act, it cannot be lost sight of that in the
                 present case the appointment of Shri Justice A.D.
                 Mane is clearly contrary to the provisions of the Rules
                 governing the appointment of arbitrators by ICADR,
                 which the parties had agreed to abide by in the matter
                 of such appointment. The option given to the
                 respondent Corporation to go beyond the panel
                 submitted by ICADR and to appoint any person of its
                 choice was clearly not in the contemplation of the
                 parties. If that be so, obviously, the appointment of
                 Shri Justice A.D. Mane is non est in law. Such an
                 appointment, therefore, will not inhibit the exercise of
                 jurisdiction by this Court under 
Section 11(6)
 of the
                 Arbitration Act. It cannot, therefore, be held that the
                 present proceeding is not maintainable in law. The
                 appointment of Shri Justice A.D. Mane made beyond
                 30 days of the receipt of notice by the petitioner,
                 though may appear to be in conformity with the law
                 
laid down in
 Datar Switchgears Ltd18., is clearly
                 contrary to the agreed procedure which required the
                 appointment made by the respondent Corporation to
                 be from the panel submitted by ICADR. The said
                 appointment, therefore, is clearly invalid in law.”


 
22.       It may be noted here that the aforesaid view of the Designated

     Judge in Walter Bau AG3 was pressed into service on behalf of the

     appellant in TRF Limited4 and the opinion expressed by the 
Designated


     18   (2000) 8 SCC 151
Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                              32


     Judge was found to be in consonance with the binding authorities of this

     Court. It was observed:-



 
“32. Mr Sundaram, learned Senior Counsel for the
               appellant has also drawn inspiration from the
               judgment passed by the Designated Judge of this
               Court in Walter Bau AG3, where the learned Judge,
               after referring to Antrix Corpn. Ltd16. , distinguished
               the same and also distinguished the authority in
               
Pricol Ltd. v. Johnson Controls Enterprise Ltd.17
 and
               came to hold that: (Walter Bau AG case3, SCC p. 806,
               para 10)

                  “10. Unless the appointment of the arbitrator is ex
                  facie valid and such appointment satisfies the
                  Court exercising jurisdiction under 
Section 11(6)

                  of the Arbitration Act, acceptance of such
                  appointment as a fait accompli to debar the
                  jurisdiction under 
Section 11(6)
 cannot be
                  countenanced in law. …”


               33. We may immediately state that the opinion
               expressed in the aforesaid case is in consonance with
               the binding authorities we have referred to
               hereinbefore.”


 
23.    In TRF Limited4, the Managing Director of the respondent had

     nominated a former Judge of this Court as sole arbitrator in terms of

     aforesaid Clause 33(d), after which the appellant had preferred an

     application under 
Section 11(5)
 read with 
Section 11(6)
 of the Act. The

     plea was rejected by the High Court and the appeal therefrom on the issue

     whether the Managing Director could nominate an arbitrator was decided

     in favour of the appellant as stated hereinabove. As regards the issue about

     fresh appointment, this Court remanded the matter to the High Court for

Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                                33


     fresh consideration as is discernible from para 55 of the Judgment. In the

     light of these authorities there is no hindrance in entertaining the instant

     application preferred by the Applicants.



     24.     It is also clear from the Clause in the instant case that no special

     qualifications such as expertise in any technical field are required of an

     arbitrator. This was fairly accepted by the learned Senior Counsel for the

     respondent.



     25.     In the aforesaid circumstances, in our view a case is made out to

     entertain the instant application preferred by the Applicants. We, therefore,

     accept the application, annul the effect of the letter dated 30.07.2019 issued

     by the respondent and of the appointment of the arbitrator. In exercise of

     the power conferred by 
Section 11(6)
 of the Act, we appoint Dr. Justice

     A.K. Sikri, former Judge of this Court as the sole arbitrator to decide all

     the disputes arising out of the Agreement dated 22.05.2017, between the

     parties, subject to the mandatory declaration made under the amended

     
Section 12
 of the Act with respect to independence and impartiality and the

     ability to devote sufficient time to complete the arbitration within the

     period as per 
Section 29A
 of the Act. A copy of the Order be dispatched

     to Dr. Justice A. K. Sikri at 144, Sundar Nagar, New Delhi - 110003 (Tel.



 
No.:- 011 - 41802321). The arbitrator shall be entitled to charge fees in

Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                               34


     terms of the 
Fourth Schedule to the Act
. The fees and other expenses shall

     be shared by the parties equally.



     26.     Before we part, we must say that the appointment of an arbitrator

     by this Court shall not be taken as any reflection on the competence and

     standing of the arbitrator appointed by the respondent. We must place on

     record that not even a suggestion in that respect was made by the learned

     counsel for the Applicants.         The matter was argued and has been

     considered purely from the legal perspective as discussed hereinabove.



     27.     This application is allowed in aforesaid terms.



                ARBITRATION APPLICATION NO.34 OF 2019

     Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr.                       …Applicants

                                         VERSUS

     HSCC (India) Ltd.                                           …Respondent



 
28.     The basic facts in this application are more or less identical except

     that the request for proposal in this case pertains to “comprehensive

     planning and designing, including preparation and development of

     concepts, master plan for the campus, preparation of all preliminary and

     working drawings for various buildings/structures, including preparation of

     specifications and schedule of quantities’ for the proposed 
All India
Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                                 35


     Institute of Medical Sciences at Kalyani, West Bengal.”. Clause No.24

     titled as “Dispute Resolution” in this case and the communication

     addressed by the Applicants are also identical and the response by the

     respondent was also similar. In this case also, appointment of a sole

     arbitrator was made by the respondent vide communication dated

     30.07.2019.



             Since the facts are identical and the submissions are common, this

     application is disposed of in terms similar to the main matter.



     29.     In the aforesaid circumstances, we accept the application, annul the

     effect of the letter dated 30.07.2019 issued by the respondent and of the

     appointment of the arbitrator.     In exercise of the power conferred by

     
Section 11(6)
 of the Act, we appoint Dr. Justice A.K. Sikri, former Judge of

     this Court as the sole arbitrator to decide all the disputes arising out of the

     Agreement dated 22.05.2017, between the parties, subject to the mandatory

     declaration made under the amended 
Section 12
 of the Act with respect to

     independence and impartiality and the ability to devote sufficient time to

     complete the arbitration within the period as per 
Section 29A
 of the Act.



 
A copy of the Order be dispatched to Dr. Justice A. K. Sikri at 144, Sundar

     Nagar, New Delhi - 110003 (Tel. No.:- 011 - 41802321). The arbitrator

Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                                36


     shall be entitled to charge fees in terms of the 
Fourth Schedule to the Act
.



     The fees and other expenses shall be shared by the parties equally.



                ARBITRATION APPLICATION NO.35 OF 2019

     Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr.                        …Applicants

                                      VERSUS

     HSCC (India) Ltd.                                            …Respondent



     30.     The basic facts in this application are more or less identical except

     that the request for proposal in this case pertains to “comprehensive

     planning and designing, including preparation and development of

     concepts, master plan for the campus, preparation of all preliminary and

     working drawings for various buildings/structures, including preparation of

     specifications and schedule of quantities’ for the proposed All India

     Institute of Medical Sciences at Nagpur, Maharashtra.” Clause No.24

     titled as “Dispute Resolution” in this case and the communication

     addressed by the Applicants are also identical and the response by the

     respondent was also similar. In this case also, appointment of a sole

     arbitrator was made by the respondent vide communication dated

     30.07.2019.



 
Since the facts are identical and the submissions are common, this

     application is disposed of in terms similar to the main matter.

Arbitration Application No.32 of 2019
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd
.


                                                                                 37


     31.     In the aforesaid circumstances, we accept the application, annul the

     effect of the letter dated 30.07.2019 issued by the respondent and of the

     appointment of the arbitrator.     In exercise of the power conferred by

     
Section 11(6)
 of the Act, we appoint Dr. Justice A.K. Sikri, former Judge of

     this Court as the sole arbitrator to decide all the disputes arising out of the

     Agreement dated 22.05.2017, between the parties, subject to the mandatory

     declaration made under the amended 
Section 12
 of the Act with respect to

     independence and impartiality and the ability to devote sufficient time to

     complete the arbitration within the period as per 
Section 29A
 of the Act.



     A copy of the Order be dispatched to Dr. Justice A. K. Sikri at 144, Sundar

     Nagar, New Delhi - 110003 (Tel. No.:- 011 - 41802321). The arbitrator

     shall be entitled to charge fees in terms of the 
Fourth Schedule to the Act
.



     The fees and other expenses shall be shared by the parties equally.



                                                          ……………………….J.
                                                            (Uday Umesh Lalit)


                                                          ……………………….J.
                                                             (Indu Malhotra)
     New Delhi;

     November 26, 2019.


