



[Cites 
55
, Cited by 
0
]




Rajasthan High Court - Jaipur


Akshay Verma Son Of Late Shri Dinesh ... vs Late Smt. Sita Devi Verma Wife Of Late ... on 25 April, 2024


Author: 
Manindra Mohan Shrivastava


Bench: 
Manindra Mohan Shrivastava


[2023:RJ-JP:41479]

          HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE FOR RAJASTHAN
                      BENCH AT JAIPUR

                 S.B. Arbitration Application No. 104/2022
Akshay Verma Son Of Late Shri Dinesh Kumar Verma, Aged 36
Years, Resident Of G-51 Vaishali Nagar, Anasagar Circular Road,
Ajmer Partner Of M/s Verma & Company, Jaipur Road, Ajmer.
                                                                            ----Applicant
                                       Versus


1.          Late Smt. Sita Devi Verma Wife Of Late Shri Bhim Singh
            Verma, Resident Of Ghee Mandi, Ajmer At Present 346,
            Gyatri Nagar-A Durgapura, Near Railway Bridge, Jaipur
            Now Deceased through her Legal Heir:-
1/1.        Smt.     Shankuntala       Verma        Wife      Of     Shri   Atual   Karel
            Daughter Of Late Smt. Sita Devi Verma, 346, Gyatri
            Nagar-A Durgapura, Near Railway Bridge, Jaipur.
1/2.        Late Shri Rajendar Verma, Resident Of 614, Saket Nagar,
            Anasagar Circular Road, Ajmer Through its Legal Heirs-
1/2/1.      Smt. Rajni Verma Wife Of Late Rajendar Verma, Aged
            About 60 Years,
1/2/2.      Smt. Kirti Verma Daughter Of Late Shri Rajendar Verma,
            Aged About 32 Years,
1/2/3.      Smt. Tripati Verma Daughter Of Late Shri Rajendar Verma,
            Aged About 30 Years,
1/2/4.      Kumari Gini Verma Daughter Of Late Shri Rajendar Verma,
            Aged About 21 Years.
            All resident of 614, Saket Nagar, Anasagar Circular Road,
            Ajmer.
                                              ----Respondents/Non-Applicants.


For Petitioner(s)            :    Mr. Ashish Kishore Saksena Advocate
                                  Mr. Harshit Mittal Advocate.

For Respondent(s)            :    Mr. Manoranjan Singh Kanak Advocate.



     HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. MANINDRA MOHAN SHRIVASTAVA
                                  (Through V.C.)





                         (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:31 PM)

    [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                  (2 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]


                                       Order
Reportable

   Pronounced on:                                                    25/04/2024


   1.    Applicant has filed this application under 
Section 11(6)
 of the

   Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as 'the

   Act of 1996') for appointment of an arbitrator in the matter of alleged

   dispute between the parties to a contract providing for adjudication of

   disputes through the process of arbitration.



   2.    As pleaded by the applicant, M/s. Verma & Company, 214, Jaipur

   Road, Ajmer is a registered firm under the provisions of 
Indian

   Partnership Act, 1932
 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act of 1932').



   After the death of one of the two partners namely; Dinesh Kumar

   Verma, his son Akshay Verma was admitted as partner w.e.f.



   24.12.2013 and new partnership was constituted which came into

   existence vide partnership deed executed on 24.12.2013 between

   Sita Devi Verma and Akshay Verma, which is duly signed by each of

   them. Clause-9 of the partnership deed provided that all the disputes

   shall be settled by the arbitration according to the provisions of the

   Act of 1996.



   3.    On 14.03.2022, one of the partners Sita Devi Verma addressed

   a communication to the Branch Manager, Bank of Baroda stating

   therein that the accounts in the name of the firm be stopped/closed

   and she also informed that she had executed a Power of Attorney in

   the name of her son-in-law Atul Karel. The Branch Manager of the

   Bank informed the other partner Akshay Verma regrading letter of

   Sita Devi Verma for freezing of the accounts of the firm. On

   21.03.2022, Akshay Verma replied that the firm had been a very old

   customer of the bank, therefore, no action or cognizance should be

   taken on the basis of the communication sent by the other partner


                         (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:31 PM)

 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                      (3 of 37)                           [ARBAP-104/2022]



Sita Devi Verma. This was followed by another communication dated

26.03.2022 through the advocate repeating request not to initiate any

action or take cognizance of the communication sent to the bank by

Sita Devi Verma. Sita Devi Verma again sent a letter on 21.04.2022

to the Branch Manager of the bank with a request to restart overdraft

account of the firm in the name of M/s. Verma & Company.



        It is further averred that Akshay Verma had submitted an

affidavit stating therein that misunderstanding between the parties

had been cleared and, therefore, consent was given to operate the

overdraft account. It was also stated in the application that Sita Devi

Verma vide communication dated 29.06.2022, addressed to the

Marketing Division, Indian Oil Corporation Ltd., stated that she was an

illiterate lady of 89 years, thus, she had forwarded the nomination of

her daughter Shakuntala Karel for partnership. In the meanwhile,

Sita Devi Verma expired on 12.07.2022.



4.      In the aforesaid background, Bank of Baroda sent a legal notice

on 04.08.2022 to the firm M/s. Verma & Company, Akshay Verma,

legal    representatives     of   deceased          Sita    Devi      Verma     and   legal

representatives      of   deceased       Rajendar          Verma      for    execution   of

necessary documents in favour of the firm by reconstituting the firm

or repay outstanding amount of Rs.1,75,33,186/- along with interest

and other expenses, failing which appropriate legal action would be

taken.



5.      As dispute had already arisen between applicant-Akshay Verma

and Sita Devi Verma (since deceased), the applicant requested the

non-applicants, i.e., legal representatives of deceased Sita Devi

Verma to settle the dispute, but despite repeated requests, non-



                          (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:31 PM)


 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                   (4 of 37)                        [ARBAP-104/2022]



applicants have not taken any step for settlement, therefore,

application has been filed for appointment of an arbitrator.



6.    By filing reply to the application, the legal representative of

deceased      Respondent    No.1/1-Shakuntala               Verma,      daughter     of

deceased partner Sita Devi Verma, while denying all the allegations,

opposed the application as misconceived and not maintainable. In

reply, it has been stated that present is not a case of any financial

dispute or any other kind of dispute between the partners of the firm

as one of the partners had died. Legal representatives of Sita Devi

Verma are being pressurized to become partners. As they are not

partners either by operation of law or the act of parties, the dispute, if

any, cannot be said to be a dispute between the partners of the firm.



The terms of the partnership deed regarding appointment of an

arbitrator in case of dispute have no legal existence as the

partnership itself stands dissolved on account of death of one of the

two partners. Respondent No.1/1-Shakuntala Verma is not even a

partner in the firm, nor has ever been associated with the firm. She

cannot be forced to enter into a contract or become a partner in the

firm against her will, therefore, there is no dispute between the

parties to a contract containing an arbitration clause. The applicant

has no cause of action against Respondent No.1/1-Shakuntala Verma,

who    is   nowhere   concerned       with       day-to-day        operation   of   the

partnership firm. Once one of the partners out of the two partners of

a partnership firm dies, the firm stands automatically dissolved under

the law and there is no partnership in existence. The partnership

deed, as existed between the applicant and deceased Sita Devi

Verma, did not have any clause that upon death of one of the

partners, the legal representatives of the deceased shall be inducted


                       (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:31 PM)

 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                       (5 of 37)                        [ARBAP-104/2022]



as partners in the firm. Therefore, there is no automatic induction of

legal representatives of deceased Sita Devi Verma in the partnership

firm, as existed between the applicant and Sita Devi Verma, while

Sita Devi Verma was alive. The arbitration clause in the partnership

deed between applicant-Akshay Verma and Sita Devi Verma can no

longer be invoked against legal representative of deceased Smt. Sita

Devi    Verma.       Answering      Respondent           No.1/1-Shakuntala        Verma,

daughter of Sita Devi Verma was neither a partner, nor has

constituted any new partnership with applicant-Akshay Verma, nor

she has any intention of getting inducted as partner. The applicant is

forcing the answering Respondent No.1/1-Shakuntala Verma to enter

into a partnership firm and forestall recovery of bank dues by

liquidating security in the form of equitable mortgage of a residential

property. It is further stated that not only Sita Devi Verma gave her

consent while she was alive, to the bank to liquidate the security and

recover the amount due, but later on Respondent No.1/1-Shakuntala

Verma has also given similar consent. The consent also states that if

excess money realises, the same be given to Respondent No.1/1-

Shakuntala Verma. As the liability of the firm was increasing day by

day due to overdraft facility, Sita Devi Verma wrote to the bank to

stop overdraft facility.



7.     Learned       counsel    for     the      applicant        would    submit    that

notwithstanding death of one of the partners Sita Devi Verma, dispute

which existed as between the applicant, one of the partners in the

firm, with the deceased partner, is an arbitrable dispute in view of

arbitration clause contained in the partnership deed between the

applicant and deceased Sita Devi Verma. Even after death of Sita Devi

Verma, the dispute between the partners of the firm may be referred


                           (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:31 PM)

 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                  (6 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]



to arbitration as the legal representative of deceased partner Smt.

Sita Devi Verma represents the estate of the deceased, which is a

secured asset against loan advanced by the bank to the firm. He

would further submit that vide communication dated 29.06.2022, Sita

Devi Verma had forwarded nomination of her daughter Shakuntala

(Respondent No.1/1) to the Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. in respect of

dealership of M/s Verma & Company. He would further submit that

death of one of the partners does not necessarily follow that the firm

is also dissolved. Dissolution of firm in such a contingency subject to

contract between the parties and intention to continue business in

partnership with legal representatives may be gathered from the

contract of the parties. He would further submit that the rule that the

partnership would be dissolved by the death of one of the partners, is

subject to a contract between the parties, which may be expressed or

implied. In the absence of any agreement to the contrary, share of

deceased partner in assets including goodwill devolves upon his/her

legal representatives, therefore, the dispute is clearly arbitrable and

an arbitrator may be appointed to adjudicate the dispute between the

applicant and the legal representative of the deceased partner.



8.    Per-contra, leaned counsel appearing for the respondents would

submit that the partnership firm in the name of M/s Verma &

Company consisted of only two partners namely; the applicant and

deceased Sita Devi Verma. Though partnership deed as between the

applicant and deceased Sita Devi Verma contained an arbitration

clause to the effect that the dispute shall be referred to arbitrator

under the Act of 1996, upon death of one of the two partners, the

firm stood automatically dissolved by operation of law. Neither before

death of Sita Devi Verma, Respondent No.1/1-Shakuntala Verma was


                      (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:31 PM)

 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                    (7 of 37)                         [ARBAP-104/2022]



inducted as partner in the then existed firm, nor thereafter, any new

partnership firm had been reconstituted between applicant-Akshay

Verma and Shakuntala Verma, or any other legal representatives of

deceased Sita Devi Verma. There is no agreement between the

parties, i.e., between the applicant and Shakuntala Verma, or other

legal representatives of deceased Sita Devi Verma to resolve their

dispute through the process of arbitration. The agreement between

applicant-Akshay Verma and Sita Devi Verma to resolve their dispute

through the process of arbitration attained its natural demise upon

death of Sita Devi Verma on account of automatic dissolution of the

partnership firm. The said agreement cannot be enforced against the

legal representatives of deceased Sita Devi Verma. Even if it is

assumed, though not admitted that there existed a dispute between

present applicant-Akshay Verma with the legal representatives of

deceased Sita Devi Verma, insofar as liquidation of secured assets

towards realisation of the bank loan and respective claims qua the

secured assets and in the absence of there being any agreement, to

refer the dispute through the process of arbitration as between the

present applicant and the legal representatives of deceased Sita Devi

Verma, no recourse could be availed to arbitration proceeding at the

instance of the applicant. Leaned counsel for the respondents would

further submit that even if it is assumed that Sita Devi Verma, when

she was alive, had sent a letter to the Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. on

29.06.2022       expressing    her     intention        to     induct    non-applicant

Respondent No. 1/1 namely; Shakuntala Verma as one of the

partners, the fact remains that Shakuntala Verma was never inducted

as partner in the firm during life time of Sita Devi Verma. It is not the

case of the applicant that after death of Sita Devi Verma, a new


                        (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:31 PM)

 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                   (8 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]



partnership had been constituted between present applicant- Akshy

Verma and Shakuntala Verma, the daughter of deceased Sita Devi

Verma. Therefore, it is contended, the dispute is non arbitrable.



9.    The non-applicants, opposing the application for reference of

dispute by appointing an arbitrator, has denied existence of an

agreement between the parties mainly on the ground that upon death

of one of the partners, the partnership firm stood dissolved and there

exists no agreement between the parties containing a clause that in

the event of any dispute between the parties, it shall be referred to

arbitration. Secondly, respondents have raised an issue regarding non

arbitrability of the dispute sought to be raised by the applicant.



Therefore, the two aforesaid issues are required to be decided before

granting applicant's application.



10.   Before I deal with the factual aspects of the case, it is apposite

to refer to recent judicial pronouncements of the Hon'ble Supreme

Court both on the aspects of existence of arbitration agreement and

non-arbitrability of the dispute.



11.   A Larger Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of

Vidya Drolia & Others Versus Durga Trading Corporation,

(2021) 2 Supreme Court Cases 1, while deciding a reference made

to it, has examined in great details the legal position with regard to

scope of judicial review at the referral stage both on the aspects of

existence of agreement and non arbitrability. Navigating through

various provisions of the Act of 1996, amendments made from time

to time and survey of earlier decisions dealing with the aforesaid

aspects, the Hon'ble Supreme Court examined legal position as

below:-



                       (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:31 PM)


 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                  (9 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]


     "26. Questions as to the existence of an arbitration
     agreement also arise when a party opposing the reference
     raises plea of novation of contract by entering into a new
     contract in substitution of the original or 'accord and
     satisfaction' by acceptance of modified obligations in
     discharge of the contract by performance or simple
     termination by express or implied consent. Similar plea of
     discharge can be raised opposing an application for
     reference on the ground that the claim is long barred and
     dead or there are no outstanding disputes as the parties
     have accepted part performance or have absolved the other
     side from performance, fully or partly, on account of
     frustration or otherwise. The contention is that once the
     original    contract   stands    extinguished,    abandoned,
     repudiated or substituted, the arbitration clause in the
     underlying/original contract perishes with it.

     27. ................

     31. We are clearly bound by the dictum of the
     Constitutional Bench judgment in Patel Engineering Ltd. that
     the scope and ambit of court's jurisdiction under 
Sections 8

     or 11 of the 
Arbitration Act
 is similar. An application under
     
Section 11
 of the Arbitration Act need not set out in detail
     the disputes or the claims and may briefly refer to the
     subject matter or broad contours of the dispute. However,
     where judicial proceedings are initiated and pending,
     specific details of the claims and disputes are normally
     pleaded and, therefore, the court or the judicial authority
     has the advantage of these details. There is a difference
     between a non-arbitrable claim and non-arbitrable subject
     matter. Former may arise on account of scope of the
     arbitration agreement and also when the claim is not
     capable of being resolved through arbitration. Generally
     non-arbitrability of the subject matter would relate to non-

 
arbitrability in law. Further, the decision in Sukanya
     Holdings (P) Ltd. has to be read along with subsequent
     judgment of this Court in 
Chloro Controls India Private
     Limited v. Severn Trent Water Purification Inc.
 (2013) 1
     SCC 641.


     32. ............

     71. Complexity is not sufficient to ward off arbitration. In
     terms of the mandate of Section 89 of the Civil Procedure
     Code and the object and purpose behind the 
Arbitration Act

     and the mandatory language of 
Sections 8
 and 
11
, the
     mutually agreed arbitration clauses must be enforced. The
     language of 
Sections 8
 and 
11
 of the Arbitration Act are
     peremptory in nature. 
Arbitration Act
 has been enacted to
     promote arbitration as a transparent, fair, and just
     alternative to court adjudication. Public policy is to
     encourage and strengthen arbitration to resolve and settle
     economic, commercial and civil disputes. Amendments from
     time to time have addressed the issues and corrected the
     inadequacies and flaws in the arbitration procedure. It is for
     the stakeholders, including the arbitrators, to assure that


                      (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:31 PM)

 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                 (10 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]


     the arbitration is as impartial, just, and fair as court
     adjudication. It is also the duty of the courts at the post-
     award stage to selectively yet effectively exercise the
     limited jurisdiction, within the four corners of 
Section 34(2)


     (b)(ii) read with Explanations 1 and 2 and check any conflict
     with the fundamental policy of the applicable law. We would
     subsequently refer to the 'second look' principle which is
     applicable in three specific situations dealing with
     arbitrability as per the mandate of 
Section 34
 of the
     Arbitration Act.

     72. Recently, the Supreme Court of Canada in TELUS
     Communications Inc. v. Avraham Wellman, (2019) SCC 19
     while conceding that arbitration as a method of dispute
     resolution was met with "overt hostility" for a long time on
     public policy grounds as it ousts jurisdiction of courts,
     observed that the new legislation, the 
Arbitration Act
 of
     1991, marks a departure as it encourages parties to adopt
     arbitration in commercial and other matters. By putting
     party autonomy on a high pedestal, the Act mandates that
     the parties to a valid arbitration agreement must abide by
     the consensual and agreed mode of dispute resolution. The
     courts must show due respect to arbitration agreements
     particularly in commercial settings by staying the court
     proceedings, unless the legislative language is to the
     contrary. The principle of party autonomy goes hand in
     hand with the principle of limited court intervention, this
     being the fundamental principle underlying modern
     arbitration law. Party autonomy is weaker in non-negotiated
     "take it or leave it" contracts and, therefore, the legislature
     can through statutes shield the weakest and vulnerable
     contracting parties like consumers. This is not so in
     negotiated agreements or even in adhesion contracts having
     an arbitration clause in commercial settings. Virtues of
     commercial and civil arbitration have been recognised and
     accepted and the courts even encourage the use of
     arbitration.

     73 ...............

     76. In view of the above discussion, we would like to
     propound a four-fold test for determining when the subject
     matter of a dispute in an arbitration agreement is not
     arbitrable:

     76.1 (1) when cause of action and subject matter of the
     dispute relates to actions in rem, that do not pertain to
     subordinate rights in personam that arise from rights in
     rem.

     76.2 (2) when cause of action and subject matter of the
     dispute affects third party rights; have erga omnes effect;

     require centralized adjudication, and mutual adjudication
     would not be appropriate and enforceable.

     76.3 (3) when cause of action and subject matter of the
     dispute relates to inalienable sovereign and public interest
     functions of the State and hence mutual adjudication would
     be unenforceable.



                      (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)


 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                 (11 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]


     76.4 (4) when the subject-matter of the dispute is expressly
     or by necessary implication non-arbitrable as per mandatory
     statute(s).

     76.5 These tests are not watertight compartments; they
     dovetail and overlap, albeit when applied holistically and
     pragmatically will help and assist in determining and
     ascertaining with great degree of certainty when as per law
     in India, a dispute or subject matter is non-arbitrable. Only
     when the answer is affirmative that the subject matter of
     the dispute would be non-arbitrable.

     76.6. However, the aforesaid principles have to be applied
     with care and caution as observed in Olympus
     Superstructures (P) Ltd.: (SCC p.669, para 35)
          "35...Reference is made there to certain disputes
          like criminal offences of a public nature, disputes
          arising out of illegal agreements and disputes
          relating to status, such as divorce, which cannot be
          referred to arbitration. It has, however, been held
          that if in respect of fats relating to a criminal matter,
          say, physical injury, if there is a right to damages
          for personal injury, then such a dispute can be
          referred to arbitration (Keir v. Leeman). 
Similarly, it
          has been held that a husband and a wife may refer
          to arbitration the terms on which they shall
          separate, because they can make a valid agreement
          between themselves on that matter (Soilleux v.
          Herbst, 
Wilson v. Wilson
 and Cahill v. Cahill)."


     77. Applying the above principles to determine non-
     arbitrability, it is apparent that insolvency or intracompany
     disputes have to be addressed by a centralized forum, be
     the court or a special forum, which would be more efficient
     and has complete jurisdiction to efficaciously and fully
     dispose of the entire matter. They are also actions in rem.
     Similarly, grant and issue of patents and registration of
     trademarks are exclusive matters falling within the
     sovereign or government functions and have erga omnes
     effect. Such grants confer monopoly rights. They are non-
     arbitrable. Criminal cases again are not arbitrable as they
     relate to sovereign functions of the State. Further,
     violations of criminal law are offenses against the State and
     not just against the victim. Matrimonial disputes relating to
     the dissolution of marriage, restitution of conjugal rights
     etc. are not arbitrable as they fall within the ambit of
     sovereign functions and do not have any commercial and
     economic value. The decisions have erga omnes effect.
     Matters relating to probate, testamentary matter etc. are
     actions in rem and are a declaration to the world at large
     and hence are non-arbitrable.

     78. ............

     82. Issue of non-arbitrability can be raised at three
     stages. First, before the court on an application for
     reference under 
Section 11
 or for stay of pending judicial
     proceedings and reference under 
Section 8
 of the


                      (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)

 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                  (12 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]


     
Arbitration Act
; secondly, before the arbitral tribunal during
     the course of the arbitration proceedings; or thirdly, before
     the court at the stage of the challenge to the award or its
     enforcement. Therefore, the question - 'Who decides non-
     arbitrability?' and, in particular, the jurisdiction of the court
     at the first look stage, that is, the referral stage.

     83. .............

     84. 
Under the Arbitration Act, 1940
, the jurisdiction to
     settle and decide non-arbitrability issues relating to
     existence, validity, scope as well as whether the subject
     matter was capable of arbitration, with possible exception
     in case of termination, novation, frustration and 'accord
     and satisfaction' when contested on facts, was determined
     and decided at the first or at the reference stage by the
     courts. The principle being that the court should be
     satisfied about the existence of a valid arbitration
     agreement and that the disputes have arisen with regard to
     the subject matter of the arbitration agreement. At this
     stage, the court would be, however, not concerned with the
     merits or sustainability of the disputes. Despite best efforts
     to contain obstructive tactics, adjudication and final
     decision of non-arbitrability issues at the reference stage
     would invariably stop, derail and thwart the proceedings in
     the courts for years.

     85. ...............

 
103. On the ambit of the Court's jurisdiction at the
     reference stage, it was observed in 
Shin-Etsu Chemical Co.
     Ltd. v. Aksh Optifibre Ltd. and Another
 (2005) 7 SCC 234
     that the correct approach to the review of the arbitration
     agreement would be restricted to prima facie finding that
     there exists an arbitration agreement that is not null and
     void, inoperative or incapable of being performed. The key
     rationale for holding that the courts' review of the
     arbitration agreement should be limited to a prima facie
     standard is the principle of competence- competence.
     Further, were the courts are to be empowered to fully
     scrutinize the arbitration agreement an arbitral proceeding
     would have to be stayed until such time that the court
     seized of the matter renders a decision on the arbitration
     agreement. If the finding of the courts would be a final and
     determinative conclusion, then it is obvious that, until such
     a pronouncement is made, the arbitral proceedings would
     have to hang in abeyance. This evidently would defeat the
     credo and ethos of the 
Arbitration Act
, which is to enable
     expeditious arbitration without avoidable intervention by
     the judicial authorities. As a result, the approach to be
     adopted at the reference stage is whether it is 'plainly
     arguable' that the arbitration agreement is in existence.
     The judgment laid emphasis on the fact that the rule of
     priority in favour of the arbitrators is counter-balanced by
     the courts' power to review the existence and validity of
     the arbitration agreement at the end of the arbitral



                       (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)

 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                 (13 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]


     process.
 
It was elucidated: (
Shin-Etsu Chemical Co. Ltd
,
     Supra).


          "74..... Even if the court takes the view that the
          arbitral agreement is not vitiated or that it is not
          invalid, inoperative or unenforceable, based upon
          purely a prima facie view, nothing prevents the
          arbitrator from trying the issue fully and rendering a
          final decision thereupon ....

          75..... Even after the court takes a prima facie view
          that the arbitration agreement is not vitiated on
          account of factors enumerated in 
Section 45
, and the
          arbitrator upon a full trial holds that there is no
          vitiating factor in the arbitration agreement and
          makes an award, such an award can be challenged
          under 
Section 48(1)(a)
. The award will be set aside if
          the party against whom it is invoked satisfies the
          court inter alia that the agreement was not valid
          under the law to which the parties had subjected it or
          under the law of the country where the award was
          made. The two basic requirements, namely,
          expedition at the pre-reference stage, and a fair
          opportunity to contest the award after full trial,
          would be fully satisfied by the interpreting 
Section 45

          as enabling the court to act on a prima facie view.

                           *          *          *

          105. ..... [T]he object of the Act would be defeated if
          the proceedings remain pending in the court even
          after commencing of the arbitration. It is precisely
          for this reason that I am inclined to the view that at
          the pre-reference stage contemplated by 
Section 45
,
          the court is required to take only a prima facie view
          for making the reference, leaving the parties to a full
          trial either before the Arbitral Tribunal or before the
          court at the post-award stage."

     104. ...........

 
132. The courts at the referral stage do not perform
     ministerial functions. They exercise and perform judicial
     functions when they decide objections in terms of 
Sections
     8
 and 
11
 of the Arbitration Act. 
Section 8
 prescribes the
     courts to refer the parties to arbitration, if the action
     brought is the subject of an arbitration agreement, unless it
     finds that prima facie no valid arbitration agreement exists.
     Examining the term 'prima facie', in 
Nirmala J. Jhala v.
     State of Gujarat
, (2013) 4 SCC 301, this Court had noted:


     (SCC p.320, para 48)
         "48. '27.... A prima facie case does not mean a case
         proved to the hilt but a case which can be said to be
         established if the evidence which is led in support of
         the case were [to be] believed. While determining
         whether a prima facie case had been made out or not
         the relevant consideration is whether on the evidence
         led it was possible to arrive at the conclusion in
         question and not whether that was the only


                      (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)

 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                 (14 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]


         conclusion which could be arrived at on that
         evidence.' "

     133. Prima facie case in the context of 
Section 8
 is not to
     be confused with the merits of the case put up by the
     parties which has to be established before the arbitral
     tribunal. It is restricted to the subject matter of the suit
     being prima facie arbitrable under a valid arbitration
     agreement. Prima facie case means that the assertions on
     these aspects are bona fide. When read with the principles
     of separation and competence-competence and 
Section 34

     of the Arbitration Act, the referral court without getting
     bogged-down would compel the parties to abide unless
     there are good and substantial reasons to the contrary.

 
134. Prima facie examination is not full review but a
     primary first review to weed out manifestly and ex facie
     non-existent and invalid arbitration agreements and non-
     arbitrable disputes. The prima facie review at the reference
     stage is to cut the deadwood and trim off the side branches
     in straight forward cases where dismissal is barefaced and
     pellucid and when on the facts and law the litigation must
     stop at the first stage. Only when the court is certain that
     no     valid    arbitration  agreement      exists  or   the
     disputes/subject matter are not arbitrable, the application
     under 
Section 8
 would be rejected. At this stage, the court
     should not get lost in thickets and decide debatable
     questions of facts. Referral proceedings are preliminary and
     summary and not a mini trial. This necessarily reflects on
     the nature of the jurisdiction exercised by the court and in
     this context, the observations of B.N. Srikrishna, J. of
     "plainly arguable" case in 
Shin-Etsu Chemical Co. Ltd.

     (Supra) are of importance and relevance.
 
Similar views are
     expressed by this Court in 
Vimal Kishor Shah v. Jayesh
     Dinesh Shah
 (2016) 8 SCC 788 wherein the test applied at
     the pre-arbitration stage was whether there is a "good
     arguable case" for the existence of an arbitration
     agreement.


     135. ..........

     139. We would not like be too prescriptive, albeit observe
     that the court may for legitimate reasons, to prevent
     wastage of public and private resources, can exercise
     judicial discretion to conduct an intense yet summary prima
     facie review while remaining conscious that it is to assist
     the arbitration procedure and not usurp jurisdiction of the
     arbitral tribunal. Undertaking a detailed full review or a
     long-drawn review at the referral stage would obstruct and
     cause delay undermining the integrity and efficacy of
     arbitration as a dispute resolution mechanism. Conversely,
     if the court becomes too reluctant to intervene, it may
     undermine effectiveness of both the arbitration and the
     court. There are certain cases where the prima facie
     examination may require a deeper consideration. The
     court's challenge is to find the right amount of and the
     context when it would examine the prima facie case or


                      (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)

 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                 (15 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]


     exercise restraint. The legal order needs a right balance
     between avoiding arbitration obstructing tactics at referral
     stage and protecting parties from being forced to arbitrate
     when the matter is clearly non-arbitrable.

     140. ............

     143. We would now examine 
Section 11
 of the Arbitration
     Act. As noticed above sub-section (6-A) was inserted by
     the Act 3 of 2016 with retrospective effect from 23-10-
     2015 and omitted by Act 33 of 2019. 
Section 11 (6)

     requires the court to appoint an arbitrator on an application
     made by a party. Section (6-A) to 
Section 11
 stipulates
     that the court shall, at the stage of appointment under sub-
     sections (4), (5) or (6), confine itself to the examination of
     the existence of an arbitration agreement. Sub-section (6-
     A) was omitted by Act 33 of 2019, but the omission is in
     view of the introduction of a new regime of institutionalised
     arbitration as per the report of the committee headed by
     Justice B. N. Srikrishna, dated 30-07-2017 which records
     for the reason of recommending the omission as:

         "Thus, it can be seen that after the Amendment Act of
         2019, 
Section 11
 (6-A) has been omitted because
         appointment       of  arbitrators   is    to   be  done
         institutionally, in which case the Supreme Court or
         the High Court under the old statutory regime are no
         longer     required    to   appoint    arbitrators  and
         consequently to determine whether an arbitration
         agreement exists."

     144. As observed earlier, SBP & Co. v. Patel Engineering
     Ltd. (2005) 8 SCC 618 explains and holds that 
Sections 8

     and 
11
 are complementary in nature as both relate to
     reference to arbitration. 
Section 8
 applies when judicial
     proceeding is pending and an application is filed for stay of
     judicial proceeding and for reference to arbitration.
     Amendments to 
Section 8
 vide Act 3 of 2016 have not been
     omitted. 
Section 11
 covers the situation where the parties
     approach a court for appointment of an arbitrator. 
Mayavati
     Trading Private Ltd. v. Pradyuat Deb Burman
, (2019) 8
     SCC 714 in our humble opinion, rightly holds that Patel
     Engineering Ltd. (Supra) has been legislatively overruled
     and hence would not apply even post omission of Sub-
     section (6-A) to 
Section 11
 of the Arbitration Act.
 
Mayavati
     Trading Private Ltd.
 (Supra) has elaborated upon the object
     and purposes and history of the amendment to 
Section 11
,
     with reference to Sub-section (6-A) to elucidate that the
     Section, as originally enacted, was facsimile with 
Article 11

     of the UNCITRAL Model of law of arbitration on which the
     
Arbitration Act
 was drafted and enacted. Referring to the
     legislative scheme of 
Section 11
, different interpretations,
     and the Law Commission's Reports, it has been held that
     the omitted Sub-section (6-A) to 
Section 11
 of the
     Arbitration Act would continue to apply and guide the
     courts on its scope of jurisdiction at stage one, that is, the
     pre-arbitration stage.




                      (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)


 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                  (16 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]



     145. Omission of Sub-section (6-A) by Act 33 of 2019 was
     with the specific object and purpose and is relatable to by
     substitution of Sub-sections (12), (13) and (14) to 
Section
     11
 of the Arbitration Act by Act 33 of 2019, which, vide
     Sub-section (3A) stipulates that the High Court and this
     court shall have the power to designate the arbitral
     institutions which have been so graded by the Council
     under Section 43-I, provided where a graded arbitral
     institution is not available, the concerned High Court shall
     maintain a panel of arbitrators for discharging the function
     and thereupon the High Court shall perform the duty of an
     arbitral institution for reference to the arbitral tribunal.
     Therefore, it would be wrong to accept that post omission
     of Sub-section (6-A) to 
Section 11
 the ratio in Patel
     Engineering Ltd. (Supra) would become applicable.

     146. We now proceed to examine the question, whether
     the word 'existence' in 
Section 11
 merely refers to contract
     formation (whether there is an arbitration agreement) and
     excludes the question of enforcement (validity) and
     therefore the latter falls outside the jurisdiction of the court
     at the referral stage. On jurisprudentially and textualism it
     is possible to differentiate between existence of an
     arbitration agreement and validity of an arbitration
     agreement. Such interpretation can draw support from the
     plain meaning of the word "existence'. However, it is
     equally possible, jurisprudentially and on contextualism, to
     hold that an agreement has no existence if it is not
     enforceable and not binding. Existence of an arbitration
     agreement presupposes a valid agreement which would be
     enforced by the court by relegating the parties to
     arbitration. Legalistic and plain meaning interpretation
     would be contrary to the contextual background including
     the definition clause and would result in unpalatable
     consequences. A reasonable and just interpretation of
     'existence' requires understanding the context, the purpose
     and the relevant legal norms applicable for a binding and
     enforceable     arbitration    agreement.      An    agreement
     evidenced in writing has no meaning unless the parties can
     be compelled to adhere and abide by the terms. A party
     cannot sue and claim rights based on an unenforceable
     document. Thus, there are good reasons to hold that an
     arbitration agreement exists only when it is valid and legal.
     A void and unenforceable understanding is no agreement to
     do anything. Existence of an arbitration agreement means
     an arbitration agreement that meets and satisfies the
     statutory requirements of both the Arbitration Act and the
     Contract Act and when it is enforceable in law.

     147. We would proceed to elaborate and give further
     reasons:

     147.1. 
In 
Garware Wall Ropes Ltd. v. Coastal Marine
     Constructions & Engg. Ltd.
 (2019) 9 SCC 209, this Court
     had examined the question of stamp duty in an underlying
     contract with an arbitration clause and in the context had


                       (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)

 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                  (17 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]


     drawn a distinction between the first and second part of
     
Section 7(2)
 of the Arbitration Act, albeit the observations
     made and quoted above with reference to 'existence' and
     'validity' of the arbitration agreement being apposite and
     extremely important, we would repeat the same by
     reproducing para 29 thereof: (SCC p.238)
         "29. This judgment in United India Insurance Co.


 
Ltd. v. Hyundai Engg. & Constructions Co. Ltd.

         (2018) 17 SCC 607 is important in that what was
         specifically under consideration was an arbitration
         clause which would get activated only if an insurer
         admits or accepts liability. Since on facts it was
         found that the insurer repudiated the claim, though
         an arbitration clause did "exist", so to speak, in the
         policy, it would not exist in law, as was held in that
         judgment, when one important fact is introduced,
         namely, that the insurer has not admitted or
         accepted liability. Likewise, in the facts of the
         present case, it is clear that the arbitration clause
         that is contained in the sub-contract would not
         "exist" as a matter of law until the sub-contract is
         duly stamped, as has been held by us above.
 
The
         argument that        
Section 11
(6-A) deals with
         "existence", as opposed to 
Section 8
, 
Section 16
 and
         
Section 45
, which deal with "validity" of an
         arbitration agreement is answered by this Court's
         understanding of the expression "existence" in
         
United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Hyundai Engg. &
         Construction Co. Ltd., (Supra
), as followed by us."
     Existence and validity are intertwined, and arbitration
     agreement does not exist if it is illegal or does not satisfy
     mandatory legal requirements. Invalid agreement is no
     agreement.


     147.2. The court at the reference stage exercises judicial
     powers. 'Examination', as an ordinary expression in
     common parlance, refers to an act of looking or considering
     something carefully in order to discover something (as per
     Cambridge Dictionary). It requires the person to inspect
     closely, to test the condition of, or to inquire into carefully
     (as per Merriam-Webster Dictionary). It would be rather
     odd for the court to hold and say that the arbitration
     agreement exists, though ex facie and manifestly the
     arbitration agreement is invalid in law and the dispute in
     question is non-arbitrable. The court is not powerless and
     would not act beyond jurisdiction, if it rejects an application
     for reference, when the arbitration clause is admittedly or
     without doubt is with a minor, lunatic or the only claim
     seeks a probate of a will.

     147.3. Most scholars and jurists accept and agree that the
     existence and validity of an arbitration agreement are the
     same. Even Starvos Brekoulakis accepts that validity, in
     terms of substantive and formal validity, are questions of
     contract and hence for the court to examine.



                       (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)


 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                 (18 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]


     147.4. Most jurisdictions accept and require prima facie
     review by the court on non-arbitrability aspects at the
     referral stage.

     147.5. 
Sections 8
 and 
11
 of the Arbitration Act are
     complementary provisions as was held in Patel Engineering
     Ltd.(Supra). The object and purpose behind the two
     provisions is identical to compel and force parties to abide
     by their contractual understanding. This being so, the two
     provisions should be read as laying down similar standard
     and not as laying down different and separate parameters.
     
Section 11
 does not prescribe any standard of judicial
     review by the court for determining whether an arbitration
     agreement is in existence. 
Section 8
 states that the judicial
     review at the stage of reference is prima facie and not final.
     Prima facie standard equally applies when the power of
     judicial review is exercised by the court under 
Section 11
 of
     the Arbitration Act. Therefore, we can read the mandate of
     valid arbitration agreement in 
Section 8
 into mandate of
     
Section 11
, that is, 'existence of an arbitration agreement'.
     147.6. Exercise of power of prima facie judicial review of
     existence as including validity is justified as a court is the
     first forum that examines and decides the request for the
     referral. Absolute "hands off" approach would be
     counterproductive and harm arbitration, as an alternative
     dispute resolution mechanism. Limited, yet effective
     intervention is acceptable as it does not obstruct but
     effectuates arbitration.

     147.7. Exercise of the limited prima facie review does not
     in any way interfere with the principle of competence-
     competence and separation as to obstruct arbitration
     proceedings but ensures that vexatious and frivolous
     matters get over at the initial stage.

     147.8. Exercise of prima facie power of judicial review as to
     the validity of the arbitration agreement would save costs
     and check harassment of objecting parties when there is
     clearly no justification and a good reason not to accept plea
     of non-arbitrability. 
In 
Subrata Roy Sahara v. Union of
     India
, (2014) 8 SCC 470, this Court has observed: (SCC
     p.642, para 191)
        "191. The Indian judicial system is grossly afflicted
        with frivolous litigation. Ways and means need to be
        evolved to deter litigants from their compulsive
        obsession towards senseless and ill-considered claims.
        One needs to keep in mind that in the process of
        litigation, there is an innocent sufferer on the other
        side of every irresponsible and senseless claim. He
        suffers long-drawn anxious periods of nervousness and
        restlessness, whilst the litigation is pending without
        any fault on his part. He pays for the litigation from
        out of his savings (or out of his borrowings) worrying
        that the other side may trick him into defeat for no
        fault of his. He spends invaluable time briefing counsel
        and preparing them for his claim. Time which he


                      (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)

 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                 (19 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]


        should have spent at work, or with his family, is lost,
        for no fault of his. Should a litigant not be
        compensated for what he has lost for no fault? The
        suggestion to the legislature is that a litigant who has
        succeeded must be compensated by the one who has
        lost. The suggestion to the legislature is to formulate a
        mechanism that anyone who initiates and continues a
        litigation senselessly pays for the same. It is
        suggested that the legislature should consider the
        introduction of a "Code of Compulsory Costs"."


147.9 Even in 
Duro Felguera, S.A. v. Gangavaram Port Ltd.

     (2017) 9 SCC 729, Kurian Joseph, J., in para 52, had
     referred to 
Section 7(5)
 and thereafter in para 53 referred
     to a judgment of this Court in 
M.R. Engineers and
     Contractors (P) Limited v. Som Datt Builders Limited
,
     (2009) 7 SCC 696 to observe that the analysis in the said
     case supports the final conclusion that the Memorandum of
     Understanding in the said case did not incorporate an
     arbitration clause.
 
Thereafter, reference was specifically
     made to SBP & Co. v. Patel Engineering Ltd. (Supra) and
     
National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Boghara Polyfab (P) Limited

     (2009) 1 SCC 267 to observe that the legislative policy is
     essential to minimise court's interference at the pre-arbitral
     stage and this was the intention of sub-section (6) to
     
Section 11
 of the Arbitration Act.
 
Paragraph 48 in 
Duro
     Felguera, S.A.
 (Supra) specifically states that the resolution
     has to exist in the arbitration agreement, and it is for the
     court to see if the agreement contains a clause which
     provides for arbitration of disputes which have arisen
     between the parties. Para 59 is more restrictive and
     requires the court to see whether an arbitration agreement
     exists - nothing more, nothing less. Read with the other
     findings, it would be appropriate to read the two
     paragraphs as laying down the legal ratio that the court is
     required to see if the underlying contract contains an
     arbitration clause for arbitration of the disputes which have
     arisen between the parties - nothing more, nothing less.


Reference to decisions in Patel Engineering Ltd. (Supra)
     and 
Boghara Polyfab Private Limited
 (Supra) was to
     highlight that at the reference stage, post the amendments
     vide Act 3 of 2016, the court would not go into and finally
     decide different aspects that were highlighted in the two
     decisions.


     147.10. 
In addition to 
Garware Wall Ropes Ltd.
 (Supra),
     this Court in 
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Narbheram
     Power & Steel (P) Ltd.
 (2018) 6 
SCC 534 and Hyundai
     Engg. & Construction Co. Ltd.
 (Supra), both decisions of
     three Judges, has rejected the application for reference in
     the insurance contracts holding that the claim was beyond
     and not covered by the arbitration agreement.
 
The court
     felt that the legal position was beyond doubt as the scope
     of the arbitration clause was fully covered by the dictum in
     
Vulcan Insurance Co. Ltd v. Maharaj Singh
 (1976) 1 SCC


                      (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)

 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                 (20 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]


 
943. Similarly, in M/s. PSA Mumbai Investments PTE.
     
Limited v. Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust
, (2018) 10 SCC 525,
     this Court at the referral stage came to the conclusion that
     the arbitration clause would not be applicable and govern
     the disputes. Accordingly, the reference to the arbitral
     tribunal was set aside leaving the respondent to pursue its
     claim before an appropriate forum.


     147.11. The interpretation appropriately balances the
     allocation of the decision-making authority between the
     court at the referral stage and the arbitrators' primary
     jurisdiction to decide disputes on merits. The court as the
     judicial forum of the first instance can exercise prima facie
     test jurisdiction to screen and knockdown ex facie
     meritless, frivolous and dishonest litigation. Limited
     jurisdiction of the courts ensures expeditious, alacritous
     and efficient disposal when required at the referral stage.

     148. ............

     153. Accordingly, we hold that the expression 'existence of
     an arbitration agreement' in 
Section 11
 of the Arbitration
     Act, would include aspect of validity of an arbitration
     agreement, albeit the court at the referral stage would
     apply the prima facie test on the basis of principles set out
     in this judgment. In cases of debatable and disputable
     facts, and good reasonable arguable case, etc., the court
     would force the parties to abide by the arbitration
     agreement as the arbitral tribunal has primary jurisdiction
     and authority to decide the disputes including the question
     of jurisdiction and non-arbitrability.

     154. Discussion under the heading "Who decides
     Arbitrability?" can be crystallized as under:

     154.1. Ratio of the decision in Patel Engineering Ltd.

     (Supra) on the scope of judicial review by the court while
     deciding an application under 
Sections 8
 or 11 of the
     
Arbitration Act
, post the amendments by Act 3 of 2016
     (with retrospective effect from 23-10-2015) and even post
     the amendments vide Act 33 of 2019 (with effect from 09-
     08-2019), is no longer applicable.

     154.2. Scope of judicial review and jurisdiction of the court
     under 
Section 8
 and 
11
 of the Arbitration Act is identical
     but extremely limited and restricted.

     154.3. The general rule and principle, in view of the
     legislative mandate clear from Act 3 of 2016 and Act 33 of
     2019, and the principle of severability and competence-
     competence, is that the arbitral tribunal is the preferred
     first authority to determine and decide all questions of non-
     arbitrability. The court has been conferred power of
     "second look" on aspects of non-arbitrability post the award
     in terms of sub-clauses (i), (ii) or (iv) of 
Section 34(2)(a)

     or sub-clause (i) of 
Section 34(2)(b)
 of the Arbitration Act.
     154.4. Rarely as a demurrer the court may interfere at the
     
Sections 8
 or 11 stage when it is manifestly and ex facie
     certain that the arbitration agreement is non-existent,
     invalid or the disputes are non-arbitrable, though the


                      (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)

 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                  (21 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]


     nature and facet of non-arbitrability would, to some extent,
     determine the level and nature of judicial scrutiny. The
     restricted and limited review is to check and protect parties
     from being forced to arbitrate when the matter is
     demonstrably 'non-arbitrable' and to cut off the deadwood.
     The court by default would refer the matter when
     contentions relating to non-arbitrability are plainly
     arguable; when consideration in summary proceedings
     would be insufficient and inconclusive; when facts are
     contested; when the party opposing arbitration adopts
     delaying tactics or impairs conduct of arbitration
     proceedings. This is not the stage for the court to enter into
     a mini trial or elaborate review so as to usurp the
     jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal but to affirm and uphold
     integrity and efficacy of arbitration as an alternative
     dispute resolution mechanism."



        In the case of Indian Oil Corporation Limited Versus NCC

Limited, (2023) 2 Supreme Court Cases 539, the Hon'ble

Supreme Court, after survey of its earlier judicial pronouncements,

particularly the decision in the case of Vidya Drolia & Others

(Supra), observed as below:-

     "73. 
In the recent decision of this Court in 
DLF Home
     Developers Ltd. v. Rajapura Homes (P) Ltd
 (2021) 16 SCC


     743) in which this Court also had an occasion to consider
     
Section 11
(6-
A) of the Arbitration Act
 and ultimately has
     observed, after referring to and considering the decision of
     the three-Judge Bench of this Court in Vidya Drolia (supra)
     that the jurisdiction of the Court under 
Section 11
 of the
     Arbitration Act is primarily to find out whether there existed
     a written agreement between the parties for resolution of
     the dispute and whether the aggrieved party has made out
     a prima facie arguable case, it is further observed that
     limited jurisdiction, however, does not denude the Court of
     its judicial function to look beyond the bare existence of an
     arbitration clause to cut the deadwood. In the said decision,
     this Court had taken note of the observations made in the
     case of Vidya Drolia (supra) that with a view to prevent
     wastage of public and private resources, the Court may
     conduct 'prima facie review' at the stage of reference to
     weed out any frivolous or vexatious claims."



  12.    In another decision in the case of NTPC Limited Versus

  SPML Infra Limited, (2023) 9 Supreme Court Cases 385,

  the Hon'ble Supreme Court considered the legal position with



                       (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)

 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                  (22 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]


  regard to the non-arbitrability of the dispute. It was explained

  by the Hon'ble Supreme Court as below:-



     "Position of Law

     16. In the present case, we are concerned with the pre-
     referral jurisdiction of the High Court under 
Section 11
 of
     the Act and would like to underscore the limited scope
     within which an application under 
Section 11(6)
 of the
     Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 has to be considered.

     17. The position of law with respect to the pre-referral
     jurisdiction, as it existed before the advent of 
Section 11
(6-
     
A) in the Act
, was based on a well-articulated principle
     formulated by this Court in National Insurance Co. Ltd. v.

 
Boghara Polyfab (P) Ltd (2009) 1 SCC 267. In Boghara
     Polyfab, this Court held that the issue of non-arbitrability of
     a dispute will have to be examined by the Court in cases
     where accord and discharge of the contract is alleged.
     Following the principle in Boghara Polyfab, this Court in
     
Union of India v. Master Construction Co.
 (2011) 12 SCC
     349 observed that when the validity of a discharge
     voucher, no-claim certificate or a settlement agreement is
     in dispute, the Court must prima facie examine the
     credibility of the allegations before referring the parties to
     arbitration.
 
Yet again in 
New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v.
     Genus Power Infrastructure Ltd.
 (2015) 2 SCC 424, this
     Court observed that allegations of fraud, coercion, duress
     or undue influence must be prima facie substantiated
     through evidence by the party raising the allegations.




     18. In a legislative response to these precedents, through
     the 
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act
 2015,
     sub-section (6-A) was added to 
Section 11
 of the Act,
     which reads as follows:

         11. (6-A) The Supreme Court or, as the case may
         be, the High Court, while considering any application
         under sub-section (4) or sub-section (5) or sub-

         section (6), shall, notwithstanding any judgment,
         decree or order of any Court, confine to the
         examination of the existence of an arbitration
         agreement."

                                        (emphasis supplied)

     19. Taking cognizance of the legislative change, this Court
     in Duro Felguera, SA Versus Gangavaram Port Ltd., (2017)
     9 SCC 729 noted that post the 2015 Amendments, the
     jurisdiction of the Court under 
Section 11(6)
 of the Act is
     limited to examining whether an arbitration agreement
     exists between the parties-"nothing more, nothing less"

 
20. However, in the year 2019, in 
United India Insurance
     Co. Ltd. v. Antique Art Exports (P) Ltd.
 (2019) 5 SCC 362,
     this Court had nevertheless accepted an objection of




                       (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)

 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                  (23 of 37)                        [ARBAP-104/2022]


     "accord and satisfaction" in opposition to an application for
     reference to arbitration.


 
21. It did not take much time for this Court to reverse the
     approach in 
Antique Art Exports (P) Ltd.
 (Supra).
 
A three-
     Judge Bench in Mayavati Trading (P) Ltd. Versus Pradyuat
     Deb Burman (2019) 8 SCC 714 expressly overruled the
     abovereferred decision in Antique Art Exports, observing
     that: (
Mayavati Trading
 case, SCC pp. 724-25, Para-10)


 
"10. This being the position, it is clear that the law
          prior to the 2015 Amendment that has been 
laid down
          by
 this Court, which would have included going into
          whether accord and satisfaction has taken place, has
          now been legislatively overruled. This being the
          position, it is difficult to agree with the reasoning
          contained in the aforesaid judgment, as 
Section 11
(6-
          A) is confined to the examination of the existence of an
          arbitration agreement and is to be understood in the
          narrow sense as has been 
laid down in
 the judgment in
          Duro Felguera, SA."


                                                 (emphasis in original)

         Having navigated through various judicial pronouncements

  and     the    common    thread       of     prima-facie         test,   it   was

  authoritatively held as below:-



     "24. Following the general rule and the principle 
laid down
     in
 Vidya Drolia (Supra) this Court has consistently been
     holding that the Arbitral Tribunal is the preferred first
     authority to determine and decide all questions of non-
     arbitrability. In Pravin Electricals (P). 
Ltd. v. Galaxy Infra
     and Engg. (P
).
 
Ltd. (2021) 5 SCC 671, Sanjiv Prakash v.
     Seema Kukreja
 (
2021) 9 SCC 732 and Indian Oil
     Corporation Ltd. v. NCC Ltd
 (2023) 2 SCC 539., the parties
     were referred to arbitration, as the prima facie review in
     each of these cases on the objection of non-arbitrability
     was found to be inconclusive.
 Following the exception to
     the general principle that the Court may not refer parties to
     arbitration when it is clear that the case is manifestly and
     ex facie non-arbitrable, in BSNL v. Nortel Networks (India)
     (P) Ltd. (2021) 5 SCC 738 (hereinafter "Nortel Networks")
     and      Secunderabad      Cantonment        Board    v.    B.
     Ramachandraiah & Sons (2021) 5 SCC 705, arbitration was
     refused as the claims of the parties were demonstrably
     time-barred.

     Eye of the needle

     25. The above-referred precedents crystallise the position
     of law that the pre-referral jurisdiction of the courts under
     
Section 11(6)
 of the Act is very narrow and inheres two
     inquiries. The primary inquiry is about the existence and
     the validity of an arbitration agreement, which also


                       (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)

 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                  (24 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]


     includes an inquiry as to the parties to the agreement and
     the applicant's privity to the said agreement. These are
     matters which require a thorough examination by the
     referral court. The secondary inquiry that may arise at the
     reference stage itself is with respect to the non-arbitrability
     of the dispute.

     26. As a general rule and a principle, the arbitral Tribunal is
     the preferred first authority to determine and decide all
     questions of non-arbitrability. As an exception to the rule,
     and rarely as a demurrer, the Referral Court may reject
     claims which are manifestly and ex-facie non-arbitrable.
     Explaining this position, flowing from the principles laid
     down in Vidya Drolia & Others (supra), this Court in a
     subsequent decision in Nortel Networks (Supra) held:

     (Nortel Networks case, SCC p.764, para 45)
         "45. ..45.1. ... While exercising jurisdiction under
         
Section 11
 as the judicial forum, the court may exercise
         the prima facie test to screen and knockdown ex facie
         meritless, frivolous, and dishonest litigation. Limited
         jurisdiction of the courts would ensure expeditious and
         efficient disposal at the referral stage. At the referral
         stage, the Court can interfere "only" when it is
         "manifest" that the claims are ex facie time-barred and
         dead, or there is no subsisting dispute."

     27. The standard of scrutiny to examine the non-
     arbitrability of a claim is only prima facie. Referral courts
     must not undertake a full review of the contested facts;
     they must only be confined to a primary first review and let
     facts speak for themselves. This also requires the Courts to
     examine whether the assertion on arbitrability is bona fide
     or not. The prima facie scrutiny of the facts must lead to a
     clear conclusion that there is not even a vestige of doubt
     that the claim is non-arbitrable. On the other hand, even if
     there is the slightest doubt, the rule is to refer the dispute
     to arbitration."



  13.    In yet another recent judicial pronouncement in the case of

  Magic Eye Developers Private Limited Versus M/s. Green

  Edge Infrastructure Private Limited & Others, (2023) 8

  Supreme Court Cases 50, following pertinent observations

  were made by the Hon'ble Supreme Court:-



     "8. While considering the aforesaid issue, 
Section 11
(6-
A)
     of the Arbitration Act
 which has been added through the
     
Arbitration and Conciliation Amendment Act, 2015
 is
     required to be read, which reads as follows:

        "11. (6-A) The Supreme Court or, as the case may
        be, the High Court, while considering any application



                       (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)

 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                      (25 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]


        under sub-section (4) or sub-section (5) or sub-
        section (6), shall, notwithstanding any judgment,
        decree or order of any court, confine to the
        examination of the existence of an arbitration
        agreement"

        (emphasis supplied)

     9. Thus, post 
Arbitration and Conciliation Amendment Act,
     2015
, the jurisdiction of the court under 
Section 11(6)
 of
     the Act is limited to examining whether an arbitration
     agreement exists between the parties- "nothing more,
     nothing less". Thus, as per 
Section 11
(6-
A) of the Act
, it is
     the duty cast upon the Referral Court to consider the
     dispute/issue with respect to the existence of an arbitration
     agreement.

     10. At this stage, it is required to be noted that as per the
     settled position of law, pre-referral jurisdiction of the court
     under 
Section 11(6)
 of the Arbitration Act is very narrow
     and inheres two inquiries. The primary inquiry is about the
     existence and the validity of an arbitration agreement,
     which also includes an inquiry as to the parties to the
     agreement and the applicant's privity to the said
     agreement. The said matter requires a thorough
     examination by the Referral Court. (para 25 of the decision
     in NTPC). The Secondary inquiry that may arise at the
     reference stage itself is with respect to the non-arbitrability
     of the dispute. Both are different and distinct."



  14.    Keeping in forefront the above settled legal position with

  regard     to      existence   of    an     arbitration        agreement,   non-



  arbitrability and the scope of judicial review at the referral

  stage while dealing with the application under 
Section 11 (6)
 of

  the Act of 1996 seeking appointment of an arbitrator, I shall

  now deal with the issues raised in the present application.



  15.    The pleadings of the parties reveal an admitted position to

  the effect that M/s Verma & Company was a registered firm

  under the Act of 1932 and after the death of one of the two

  partners namely; Dinesh Kumar Verma, his son Akshay Verma

  (applicant herein) was admitted as partner w.e.f. 24.12.2013

  and new partnership was constituted which came into existence

  vide partnership deed executed on 24.12.2013 between Sita



                           (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)

 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                      (26 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]


  Devi Verma and Akshay Verma, which is duly signed by each of

  them. It is not in dispute that Clause-9 of the partnership deed

  provided that all the disputes shall be settled by the arbitration

  according to the provisions of the Act of 1996. Clause-9 of the

  Partnership deed reads as under:-



      "9. All disputes shall be settled by arbitration according
     to the provisions of the Indian Arbitration Act."



  16.    However, a dispute arose when Sita Devi Verma addressed

  a communication to the Bank on 14.03.2022 requesting closer

  of the accounts in the name of the firm. When Bank informed

  the other partner Akshay Verma regrading request of Sita Devi

  Verma for freezing of the accounts of the firm, the other

  partner requested the bank not to proceed with the request. It

  is also the case of the applicant that later on Sita Devi Verma

  sent a letter on 21.04.2022 to the Branch Manager of the bank

  with a request to restart overdraft account of the firm followed

  by a letter of applicant-Akshay Verma that misunderstanding

  between the parties has been cleared. In the meanwhile, Sita

  Devi Verma expired on 12.07.2022. The bank, however, sent a

  legal notice on 04.08.2022 to the firm M/s. Verma & Company,

  Akshay Verma, legal representatives of deceased Sita Devi

  Verma and legal representatives of deceased Rajendar Verma

  for execution of necessary documents in favour of the bank by

  reconstituting     the    firm     or    repay       outstanding     amount   of

  Rs.1,75,33,186/- along with interest and other expenses, failing

  which appropriate legal action would be taken.



                           (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)


 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                  (27 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]



  17.    A legal issue, therefore, which arises for consideration is

  as to whether the firm stood dissolved, there being only two

  partners and one partner having died.



         The legal position in this regard was examined by the

  Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Mohd. Laiquiddin &

  Anr. Versus Kamla Devi Mishra (Dead) By L.Rs & Ors.



  (2010) 2 Supreme Court Cases 407. One of the issues

  which arose for consideration was whether the partnership firm

  stood dissolved by virtue of 
Section 42(c)
 of the Act of 1932 on

  account of the death of one of the partners, on facts, that being

  a case where partnership consisted of only two partners and

  one of them died.



  18.    In the light of the provisions contained in 
Section 42
 of

  the Act of 1932 and despite there being a clause in the

  partnership deed to keep the same alive despite death of any

  partner, legal position was examined as below:-



     "22. The sole issue raised by the Respondents in this
     appeal, who are the appellants in Appeal No. 4411-12 of
     2002, is whether the finding of the Courts below that the
     Partnership firm stood dissolved on account of death of
     one of the partners was correct in the light of the express
     provisions of the 
Partnership Act
, namely, 
Section 42 (c)

     of the same.

     23. Before we proceed to examine the correctness of this
     concurrent findings arrived at by the Courts below, it is
     necessary to examine the relevant provisions of the
     
Partnership Act, 1923
 and the relevant clauses of the
     partnership deed entered between the original plaintiff and
     the original defendant. "Partnership" is defined under
     
Section 4
 of the Act which reads as under:

        "4. Definition of 'partnership', 'partner', 'firm' and
        'firm name.- "Partnership is the relation between
        persons who have agreed to share the profits of a
        business carried on by all or any of them acting for
        all."

     24. 
Section 42
 of the Act reads as under:



                       (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)


 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                  (28 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]


        "42. Dissolution on the happening of certain
        contingencies:- Subject to contract between the
        partners a firm is dissolved-

             (a) if constituted for a fixed term, by the
             expiry of the term;

             (b) if constituted to carry out one or more
             adventures     or    undertakings,   by    the
             completion thereof;
             (c) by the death of a partner; and
             (d) by the adjudication of a partner as an
             insolvent."
                                        (emphasis supplied)

     25. Dissolution of a partnership firm on account of death
     of one of the partners is subject to the contract entered
     into by the parties. In this context, it is pertinent to refer
     to the terms of the deed of partnership. Clause 22 of the
     Partnership deed reads as follows:

               "The partnership shall be in force for a period of
         42 years certain from this date and the death of any
         partner shall not have the effect of dissolving the
         firm."

     This clause clearly states that death of any partner shall
     not have the effect of dissolving the firm. However, in the
     facts and circumstances of the case, we are not in a
     position to give absolute effect to this clause of the deed of
     partnership.

     26. The learned counsel for the Respondents contended
     that since the parties agreed that in spite of the death of
     any of the partners, the firm shall continue for 42 years
     irrespective of the death of the original plaintiff (since
     deceased). They further, argued that it clearly
     contemplates that the legal representative of the partner,
     who dies, would be under a duty to enter into a fresh deed
     of partnership. The legal representatives were precluded
     from claiming benefits if they deny entering into a fresh
     partnership agreement.

     27. 
In order to arrive at the conclusion that the
     partnership firm stood dissolved on account of death of
     one of the partners, the High Court had rightly placed
     reliance on 
Smt. S. Parvathammal v. CIT
 (1987) 163 ITR
     161 (Mad.), wherein this Court held that in a firm
     consisting of two partners on account of death of one of
     the partners, the firm automatically dissolved and
     observed as follows: (ITR pp.161-62)
        ".... a partnership normally dissolves on the death of
        the partner unless there was an agreement in the
        original partnership deed. Even assuming that there
        was such an agreement in a partnership consisting of
        two partners, on the death of one of them the
        partnership automatically comes to an end and there
        is no partnership which survives and into which a third
        party can be introduced. Hence on the death of S, the
        original partnership was dissolved. The subsequent


                       (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)

 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                  (29 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]


        taking in of the assessee as a partner was only as a
        result of entering into of a new partnership between R
        and the assessee. Partnership was not a matter of
        heritable status but purely one of contract."
     In the light of aforementioned case, it is clear that when
     there are only two partners constituting the partnership
     firm, on the death of one of them, the firm is deemed to
     be dissolved despite the existence of a clause which says
     otherwise. A partnership is a contract between the
     partners. There cannot be any contract unilaterally without
     the acceptance by the other partner.


     28. The Appellants, the legal representatives of original
     plaintiff (since deceased) was not at all interested in
     continuing the firm or constitute a fresh firm and they
     cannot be asked to continue the partnership, as there is no
     legal obligation upon them to do so as partnership is not a
     matter of heritable status but purely one of contract,
     which is also clear from the definition of partnership under
     
Section 4
. Therefore, the trial court was justified in holding
     that the firm dissolved by virtue of death of one of the
     partners and the first appellate court as well as the High
     Court have taken the correct view in upholding the same."



  19.    In view of the aforesaid decision, the legal position is

  crystal clear that irrespective of any clause in the partnership

  deed between the two partners, to keep alive the partnership

  even after death of one of the partners, upon death of one of the

  partners, the partnership stands dissolved by operation of law.



  20.    However, the crucial question for determination would be

  whether despite dissolution of the firm, the arbitration clause

  contained in the partnership deed would still survive and binding

  on the legal representatives of the deceased partner, for the

  purposes of the Act of 1996. The legal position in this regard is

  fully explained by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Ravi

  Prakash Goel Versus Chandra Prakash Goel & Another,

  (2008) 13 Supreme Court Cases 667. The issues which arose

  for consideration and answered, were as below:-



                       (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)


 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                 (30 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]


     "16. On the above pleadings, the following questions of law
     emerge for our consideration:

       (a) Where right to sue for rendition of accounts survives
       on the legal legal representative of a deceased partner,
       are the legal representatives not entitled to invoke
       arbitration clause contained in the Partnership Deed?

       (b) Whether the arbitration can be commenced by the
       heirs after the death of partner especially where the
       dispute had arisen already during the life time of the
       partner?

       (c) Whether in view of 
section 46
 read with 
section 48
 of
       the Indian Partnership Act as well as 
section 40
 of the
       Arbitration Act, 1999, the petitioner is entitled to claim
       appointment of arbitrator under the arbitration clause of
       the Partnership Deed and the Hon'ble Chief Justice of the
       Allahabad High Court has erred in overlooking these
       provisions?"



         The legal position with reference to provisions contained

  both in the Act of 1932 and the Act of 1996 was examined by the

  Hon'ble Supreme Court which reads as below:-



     "17. Before we proceed further, it is useful to reproduce
     
Section 40
 of the Arbitration Act and 
Sections 46
, 
47
 and 
48

     of the Indian Partnership Act:

       "40. Arbitration agreement not to be discharged by death
       of party thereto.- (1) An arbitration agreement shall not
       be discharged by the death of any party thereto either as
       respects the deceased or as respects any other party, but
       shall in such event be enforceable by or against the legal
       representative of the deceased.

       (2) The mandate of an arbitrator shall not be terminated
       by the death of any party by whom he was appointed.
       (3) Nothing in this section shall affect the operation of
       any law by virtue of which any right of action is
       extinguished by the death of a person."

             *          *          *          *
       "46. Right of partners to have business wound up after
       dissolution.- On the dissolution of a firm every partner or
       his representative is entitled, as against all the other
       partners or their representatives, to have the property of
       the firm applied in payment of the debts and liabilities of
       the firm, and to have the surplus distributed among the
       partners or their representatives according to their rights.

       47. Continuing authority of partners for purposes of
       winding up.- After the dissolution of a firm the authority
       of each partner to bind the firm, and the other mutual
       rights and obligations of the partners, continue
       notwithstanding the dissolution, so far as may be
       necessary to wind up the affairs of the firm and to


                      (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)

 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                 (31 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]


       complete transactions begun but unfinished at the time of
       the dissolution, but not otherwise:

              Provided that the firm is in no case bound by the
       acts of a partner who has been adjudicated insolvent; but
       this proviso does not affect the liability of any person
       who has after the adjudication represented himself or
       knowingly permitted himself to be represented as a
       partner of the insolvent.

       48. Mode of settlement of accounts between partners.- In
       settling the accounts of a firm after dissolution, the
       following rules shall, subject to agreement by the
       partners, be observed :-

           (a) losses, including deficiencies of capital, shall be
           paid first out of profits, next out of capital, and
           lastly, if necessary, by the partners individually in
           the proportions in which they were entitled to share
           profits;

           (b) the assets of the firm, including any sums
           contributed by the partners to make up deficiencies
           of capital, shall be applied in the following manner
           and order-

              (i) in paying the debts of the firm to third parties;

              (ii) in paying to each partner rateably what is due
              to him from the firm for advances as
              distinguished from capital;

              (iii) in paying to each partner rateably what is due
              to him on account of capital; and

              (iv) the residue, if any, shall be divided among
              the partners in the proportions in which they were
              entitled to share profits."

     18. It is clear from 
Section 40
 of the Arbitration Act that an
     arbitration agreement is not discharged by the death of any
     party thereto and on such death it is enforceable by or
     against the legal representatives of the deceased, nor is the
     authority of the arbitrator revoked by the death of the party
     appointing him, subject to the operation of any law by virtue
     of which the death of a person extinguishes the right of
     action of that person.

     19. 
Section 2(1)(g)
 defines "legal representative" which
     reads thus:

         "2. (1)(g) "Legal Representative" means a person who
         in law represents the estate of a deceased person, and
         includes any person who intermeddles with the estate
         of the deceased person, and, where a party acts in a
         representative character, the person on whom the
         estate develops on the death of the party so acting;"

     20. The definition of 'legal representative' became necessary
     because such representatives are bound by and also entitled
     to enforce an arbitration agreement. 
Section 40
 clearly says
     that an arbitration agreement is not discharged by the death
     of a party. The agreement remains enforceable by or against
     the legal representatives of the deceased. In our opinion, a
     person who has the right to represent the estate of deceased


                      (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)

 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                  (32 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]


     person occupies the status of a legal person (sic
     representative). 
Section 35
 of the 1996 Act which imparts the
     touch of finality to an arbitral award says that the award shall
     have binding effect on the "parties and persons claiming
     under them". Persons claiming under the rights of a deceased
     person are the personal representative of the deceased party
     and they have the right to enforce the award and are also
     bound by it. The arbitration agreement is enforceable by or
     against the legal representative of a deceased party provided
     the right to sue in respect of the cause of action survives.

     21. We have already extracted 
Sections 46
, 
47
 & 
48
 of the
     Partnership Act. 
Section 46
 provides two things, namely, first
     is to realize the assets of the business and then to apply the
     same for discharge of liabilities and finally to distribute the
     surplus, if any, among the partners. All that 
Section 46

     empowers is that every partner shall claim that this is to be
     done for ultimate distribution of the surplus to the partners
     according to their shares. A suit to enforce the latter right
     relating to the distribution of surplus is generally called a suit
     for an account which means account taken up accordingly.
     This right to a partner to file a suit for account is not affected
     by the fact that the retiring partner has already inspected the
     accounts of the firm. 
Section 46
 is, however, merely
     declaratory of the rights of the partners or their legal
     representatives in the surplus and does not set out the mode
     of calculating the surplus. The share of a partner upon the
     winding up of a dissolved firm, is only in the residue which is
     left after the liabilities mentioned in the various clauses of
     
Section 48
 have been paid out. Payment of capital and
     advances to partners is not out of the residue. The amount
     paid as capital investment to a partner will have to be
     deducted in order to find the value of the residue, because the
     value of a partner's share is only his proportion of the residue.

        22. "Right of Representative of a Partner.- The right of a
        representative of a partner is really a claim against the
        surplus assets on realisation-whether the surplus consists
        entirely of the proceeds of realisation or whether they
        include some specific items of property, which existed on
        the death of the partner. The proper remedy of a partner
        in the circumstances is to have accounts taken to
        ascertain his share and if the right to sue for accounts is
        barred by limitation, the partner cannot sue any partner
        in possession of the assets for a share therein, and the
        limitation will be governed by 
Art.5
 of the Limitation Act."

     23. On the dissolution of the firm, the arbitration clause
     does not come to an end and so if a dispute had arisen
     during the lifetime of the deceased partner, his legal
     representatives would be entitled to take proceedings under
     
Section 20
 of the Arbitration Act, 1940.

     24. When a partner dies and the partnership comes to an
     end it is not only right but also the duty of the surviving
     partner to realize the assets for the purpose of winding up of
     the partnership affairs including the payment of the


                       (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)

 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                  (33 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]


     partnership debts. However, it is true that in a general sense
     the executors or administrators of the deceased partner may
     be said to have a lien upon the partnership assets in respect
     of his interest in the partnership and taking the partnership
     account.

     25. 
Section 47
: It is clear that the commencement of the
     dissolution does not at once terminate the authority of the
     partners. Such authority continues at least for 2 purposes,
     namely, (1) so far as necessary to wind up the affairs of the
     firm; and (2) to complete the transaction begun but had not
     yet been completed.

     26. 
Section 48
: It lays down two fundamental propositions
     which are in line of the provisions of 
Section 46
 of the
     Partnership Act, namely, (1) as to the payment of the losses;
     and (2) as to the application of the assets. It is to be noted
     that the provisions of 
Section 48
 are the culmination of the
     provisions of 
Section 46
 of the Partnership Act. Therefore,
     both the sections have to be harmoniously read together and
     interpreted.

     27. We are of the opinion that in view of the provisions of
     
Section 46
 read with 
Section 48
 of the Indian Partnership Act
     as well as 
Section 40
 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
     1996, the application for appointment of an arbitrator under
     the arbitration clause of the partnership deed was liable to be
     allowed and the learned Chief Justice has erred in overlooking
     the said provisions. While right to sue for rendition of
     accounts of partnership firm survives on the legal
     representative of a deceased partner, he is also entitled to
     invoke the arbitration clause contained in the partnership
     deed."



 
21.    Though decisions of various High Courts on this aspect have

  also been cited before this Court, it is not necessary to burden

  the view of this Court with other authorities in view of

  authoritative pronouncement of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the

  case of 
Ravi Prakash Goel
 (Supra). Therefore, the submissions

  of learned counsel for the respondents that after the death of Sita

  Devi Verma, there does not exist any arbitration agreement so as

  to entitle the applicant to seek appointment of an arbitrator in the

  matter of dispute fails and is hereby rejected, particularly when

  no other ground to assail existence and/or validity of the





                       (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)

 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                 (34 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]


  agreement has been put forth by the respondent except death of

  Sita Devi Verma.




  22. The next issue arising for consideration would be whether the

  dispute is non-arbitrable. Contents of the application seeking

  appointment of arbitrator and the notice for appointment of

  arbitrator reveal that even while Sita Devi Verma was alive, a

  dispute in relation to operation of the accounts of the firm M/s.



  Verma & Company had arisen on account of letter sent by Sita

  Devi Verma to the bank to freeze the accounts of the firm though

  according to the applicant later on, she had withdrawn such a

  request and consented for operation of the accounts. It is also

  revealed that the bank has also given legal notice to the firm and

  the legal representatives of the deceased Sita Devi Verma. The

  applicant seeks adjudication on mutual rights and duties of the

  partnership firm and determination thereof as the bank has sent a

  legal notice for realisation of the loan advanced to the bank. The

  applicant's claim is that all the partners are entitled to equal

  share in the loss and profit in the absence of there being any

  agreement in that regard and partners are jointly and severely

  liable for all acts of the firm done. According to the applicant, all

  the disputes with regard to the rights and liabilities are required

  to be determined through appropriate proceedings and, therefore,

  legal notice was given seeking appointment of an arbitrator. The

  legal representatives of the deceased are in possession of the

  estate of the deceased Sita Devi Verma.



  23. Applying test of non-arbitrability as laid down succinctly by

  the Hon'ble Supreme Court in plethora of decisions referred to


                      (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)

 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                 (35 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]


  herein above, and applying "Eye of the needle" test, it cannot be

  held that the present case is classifiable as "non-arbitrable

  dispute".



  24. In a recent judicial pronouncement in the case of VGP

  Marine Kingdom Private Limited and Another Versus Kay

  Ellen Arnold, (2023) 1 Supreme Court Cases 597, the legal

  position, as discussed in detailed herein above was reiterated as

  below:-



     "11. ...............As per the decision of this Court in the case of
     Vidya Drolia & Others (supra) unless on the facet it is found
     that the dispute is not arbitrable and if it requires
     further/deeper consideration, the dispute with respect to the
     arbitrability should be left to the arbitrator. The decision of
     this Court in the case of Vidya Drolia & Others (supra) is a
     three judges' bench subsequent decision in which the entire
     law on the scope and ambit of the Court at the stage of
     application under 
Section 11(6)
 of the Act, 1996 has been
     dealt with and considered by the Court."



         In another recent judicial pronouncement in the case of

  Meenakshi Solar Power Pvt. Ltd. Versus Abhyudaya Green

  Economic Zones Pvt. Ltd, 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1616, the

  legal position, relying upon dictum in Vidya Drolia & Others

  (Supra), was reaffirmed as below:-



     "17. Further, this Court observed that the court at the
     referral stage can interfere only when it is manifest that the
     claims are ex facie time-barred and dead, or there is no
     subsisting dispute. In the context of issue of limitation
     period, it should be referred to the Arbitral Tribunal for
     decision on merits. Similar would be the position in case of
     disputed "no-claim certificate" or defence on the plea of
     novation and "accord and satisfaction"



  25.    The legal position that when contention relating to non-



  arbitrability are plainly arguable or when facts are contested,

  Court would prefer to refer the matter for arbitration while



                      (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)

 [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                   (36 of 37)                        [ARBAP-104/2022]


  considering an application for appointment of an arbitrator under

  
Section 11
 of he Act of 1996 has been authoritatively settled in

  not only Vidya Drolia & Others (Supra), but also many other

  decisions     including   Mohammed              Masroor           Shaikh   Versus

  Bharat Bhushan Gupta & Others, (2022) 4 Supreme Court

  Cases 156 wherein, following pertinent observations were

  made:-



     "19. Thus, this Court held that while dealing with petition
     under 
Section 11
, the Court by default would refer the
     matter when contentions relating to non-arbitrability are
     plainly arguable. In such case, the issue of non-arbitrability
     is left open to be decided by the Arbitral Tribunal. On perusal
     of the impugned order, we find that the issues of non-
     arbitrability and the claim being time barred have not been
     concluded by the learned Single Judge of the Bombay High
     Court. In fact, in clause (vii) of the operative part of the
     impugned Order, the learned Single Judge has observed that
     the contentions of the parties have been kept open. The
     petitions filed by the appellant under 
Section 34
 of the
     Arbitration Act, challenging the Order dated 25-5-2021 are
     pending before the High Court in which the appellant can
     raise all permissible contentions."



         Similar are the observations made in plethora of decisions

  which were quoted with approval in the case of Sanjiv Prakash

  Versus Seema Kukreja and Others, (2021) 9 Supreme

  Court Cases 732, which reads as below:-



     "20. The Court in Vidya Drolia & Others (supra) then
     concluded, on the facts of that case, that it would be unsafe
     to conclude one way or the other that an arbitration
     agreement exists between the parties on a prima facie
     review of facts of that case, and that a deeper consideration
     must be left to an arbitrator, who is to examine the
     documentary and oral evidence and then arrive at a
     conclusion.

 
21.   Likewise, in 
Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. v. Nortel
     Networks India Pvt. Ltd.
, (2021) 5 SCC 738, another Division
     Bench of this Court referred to Vidya Drolia & Others (supra)
     and concluded:(BSNL) (Supra), SCC pp. 765-66, paras 46-


 
47)




                        (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)

                                    [2023:RJ-JP:41479]                 (37 of 37)                     [ARBAP-104/2022]


                                           "46.The upshot of the judgment in 
Vidya Drolia &
                                           Others v. Durga Trading Corporation
, (2021) 2 SCC 1 is
                                           affirmation of the position of law expounded in 
Duro
                                           Felguera, S.A.
 (Supra) and 
Mayavati Trading (P) Ltd.

                                           (Supra), which continue to hold the field.
 
It must be
                                           understood clearly that 
Vidya Drolia & Others
 (Supra)
                                           has not resurrected the pre-amendment position on the
                                           scope of power as held in SBP & Co. v. Patel
                                           Engineering SBP & Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd., (Supra).


                                           47. It is only in the very limited category of cases,
                                           where there is not even a vestige of doubt that the
                                           claim is ex facie time- barred, or that the dispute is
                                           non-arbitrable, that the court may decline to make the
                                           reference. However, if there is even the slightest doubt,
                                           the rule is to refer the disputes to arbitration, otherwise
                                           it would encroach upon what is essentially a matter to
                                           be determined by the tribunal."

                                        22. On the contrary, a 
Section 11
 court would refer the
                                        matter when contentions relating to non-arbitrability are
                                        plainly arguable, or when facts are contested. The court
                                        cannot, at this stage, enter into a mini trial or elaborate
                                        review of the facts and law which would usurp the
                                        jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal."



                                     26.    Resultantly, the application seeking appointment of an

                                     arbitrator is required to be allowed and the same is, accordingly,

                                     allowed. Hon'ble Mr. Justice P.K. Agarwal (Retd.), C-82, Ram

                                     Nagar, Shastri Nagar, Jaipur is appointed as the Sole Arbitrator to

                                     adjudicate upon the dispute between the parties and pass an

                                     award. The Sole Arbitrator shall be entitled to fee, as provided

                                     under Fourth Schedule appended to the Act of 1996.



                                     27. The Registry is directed to intimate Hon'ble Mr. Justice P.K.

                                     Agarwal (Retd.) regarding his appointment as Sole Arbitrator. The

                                     parties are also directed to intimate the Sole Arbitrator towards

                                     commencement of arbitral proceedings in accordance with law.



                                                                     (MANINDRA MOHAN SHRIVASTAVA),CJ

                                   SANJAY KUMAWAT-15




                                                         (Downloaded on 29/04/2024 at 08:42:32 PM)





Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
 

