



[Cites 
34
, Cited by 
0
]




Telangana High Court


Smt. Yeluvolu Blessy Sheeba vs Smt. Amgoth Anitha Nayak on 9 October, 2023


Author: 
G.Radha Rani


Bench: 
G.Radha Rani


      THE HONOURABLE DR.JUSTICE G.RADHA RANI

           CIVIL REVISION PETITION NO.1769 of 2023

O R D E R:


      This Civil Revision Petition is filed by the petitioner - plaintiff aggrieved

by the order and decree passed by the Principal District Judge, Hanumakonda in

I.A.No.630 of 2023 in O.S.No.188 of 2022 (Old O.S.No.99 of 2016) dated

15.06.2023.





2.    The brief facts of the case are that the plaintiff filed a suit for specific

performance of agreement of sale dated 31.10.2007 and for permanent

injunction. The plaintiff was in possession of the schedule property as a tenant.

The defendant to meet her family requirements offered to sell the same for a

total sale consideration of Rs.20,50,000/- and on receipt of a huge amount of

Rs.15,00,000/- as advance sale consideration, which was about 73% of the total

sale consideration, the defendant inducted the plaintiff into possession by virtue

of the agreement of sale dated 31.10.2007 and agreed to execute the registered

sale deed on receipt of balance sale consideration. The defendant failed to

furnish copy of her title deed documents to prepare a draft sale deed. The

defendant postponed to handover the original title deed documents stating that

she was yet to clear off the loans to get it released from her creditor. However,

the defendant issued a legal notice on 12.07.2016 to the plaintiff intimating

                                         2

                                                                           Dr.GRR, J
                                                                       crp_1769_2023

about the cancellation of the agreement of sale dated 31.10.2007 stating that it

was barred by limitation and that the plaintiff was not ready to pay the balance

sale consideration amount within three years from 31.10.2007 and demanded

the plaintiff to vacate the premises claiming damages of Rs.30,000/- per month.

The plaintiff got issued a reply legal notice on 21.07.2016 expressing her

willingness to perform her part of the agreement and to receive the balance sale

consideration within 15 days from the date of receipt of the legal notice. But

the said notice was returned un-served on the defendant as refused. Hence, the

plaintiff filed the suit for specific performance of agreement of sale also seeking

the relief of permanent injunction.





3.    The defendant filed written statement contending that the plaintiff was a

tenant in the schedule house prior to the alleged agreement and she was

continuing in possession in that status. The suit schedule premises was let out

to the plaintiff on oral lease on 09.01.2004 on a monthly rent of Rs.6,000/-.

Thereafter, the plaintiff approached the defendant and forced the defendant to

sell the suit house. The defendant agreed to sell the same. The agreement of

sale was reduced into writing on 31.10.2007. The sale consideration was fixed

at Rs.20,50,000/-. As on the date of agreement of sale, a sum of Rs.15,00,000/-

was received by the defendant towards advance sale consideration and the said

fact was mentioned in the agreement of sale.        It was mutually understood

between the defendant and the plaintiff that the balance sale consideration of

                                        3

                                                                       Dr.GRR, J
                                                                   crp_1769_2023

Rs.5,50,000/- would be payable within a short time. By virtue of the said

agreement of sale, no possession was delivered and the plaintiff was never

inducted into the suit premises in that status. The possession of the plaintiff

over the schedule premises was only in the capacity of tenant but not as a

purchaser. The said fact was categorically mentioned in clause (3) of the

agreement. It was mutually agreed that time was essence of the contract. The

plaintiff failed to pay the balance sale consideration within three years from

31.10.2007, which lapsed by 30.10.2010. In view of the latches on the part of

the plaintiff, the agreement was cancelled, the contract was terminated. The

defendant issued legal notice dated 12.07.2016 informing the plaintiff that the

advance amount of Rs.15,00,000/- was forfeited and the agreement was

terminated and demanded the plaintiff to vacate the premises and to pay

Rs.30,000/- towards damages every month from 01.10.2016 till she vacated the

premises.




3.1.   The defendant further stated that she also filed O.S.761 of 2016 on

21.09.2016 against the plaintiff for eviction on the file of the VII Additional

Junior Civil Judge, Warangal and also claimed mesne profits in the said suit.

She further stated that the alleged agreement of sale dated 31.10.2007 was an

outright sale deed as per the recitals in the document and the same was

inadmissible in evidence and was barred under 
Section 35
 of the Stamp Act,

1899. The same was compulsorily registerable under 
Sections 17
 and 
49
 of the

                                          4

                                                                         Dr.GRR, J
                                                                     crp_1769_2023


Registration Act, 1908
. In the absence of payment of requisite stamp duty, the

alleged documents could not be looked into as the same was barred by law and

stamp duty and penalty shall be collected on the said document.



4.    After framing the issues, the suit was posted for trial.



5.    On 28.03.2023, the plaintiff filed her evidence affidavit and got marked

Exs.A1 to A8. The defendant was not present at that time and there was no

representation for the defendant.     The court marked the agreement of sale

dated 31.10.2007 as Ex.A1 on the basis of the chief-examination affidavit of

PW.1. When the matter was coming up for cross-examination of PW.1, the

defendant filed a petition under Order XIII Rule 3 read with 
Sections 33
 and 
35


of the Stamp Act, 1899 and 
Sections 17
 and 
49
 of the Registration Act, 1908

read with 
Section 151
 of CPC to de-exhibit Ex.A1 agreement of sale and to hear

about the admissibility of the document with regard to payment of Stamp duty

and penalty stating that the same was marked without the knowledge and

consent of the defendant and the court failed to scrutinize the contents of the

said document.





6.    The plaintiff filed counter to the said application contending that once a

document had been admitted in evidence, such admission could not be called in

question at any stage of the suit or proceedings and all the objections had to be

raised before marking the document in evidence and once it was marked, it was

                                         5

                                                                         Dr.GRR, J
                                                                     crp_1769_2023

not open either to the parties or even to the court to re-examine the order. The

plaintiff also contended that though possession was delivered as per the

agreement of sale, the right and title in the schedule property remained with the

defendant. Under the said circumstances, the provision of 
Sections 33
 and 
35
 of

the Stamp Act, 1899 were not attracted. When there was contemplation of

execution of further document i.e. registration of sale deed in future in

pursuance of Ex.A1, the transferee though in possession would be holding the

property as an agreement holder but not with any clear animus that she has

become absolute owner of the property or in complete negation of any right or

title of the transferor and the provisions of 
Sections 33
 and 
35
 of the Stamp Act

were not attracted. Since the suit was for specific performance, none of the

provisions of the 
Registration Act
 were affected.



7.    On hearing both the counsel, the learned Principal District Judge,

Hanumakonda allowed the application ordering de-exhibiting of Ex.A1 holding

that the plaintiff was at liberty to get the agreement of sale dated 31.10.2007

impounded under law by paying deficit stamp duty and penalty as required

under Article 47-A of Schedule 1-
A of the Stamp Act
.



8.    Aggrieved by the said order and decree, the plaintiff preferred this

revision contending that the respondent - defendant filed the petition without

the support of any provision of law under 
the Code of Civil Procedure
 or any

supportive statute and the court ought to have rejected the petition filed by the

                                         6

                                                                           Dr.GRR, J
                                                                       crp_1769_2023

respondent - defendant at the threshold. The court below failed to appreciate

the law and the citations referred to by the petitioner - plaintiff in her written

arguments. The court below failed to appreciate the fact that the respondent -

defendant and her advocate failed to present themselves on the date of marking

of documents on behalf of the petitioner - plaintiff as PW.1 and their failure

could not be attributed to the petitioner - plaintiff for de-exhibiting the marked

exhibit as Ex.A1.     The court below failed to appreciate that even though

delivery of possession was mentioned in Ex.A1, it would not change its

character, as it would be concluded by execution of regular conveyance deed.

The document pressed into service by the petitioner - plaintiff was for the relief

of specific performance in her favour. It does not hit the language employed in


Section 17
 of the Indian Stamp Act and 
Section 49
 of the Registration Act. The

court below ought to have considered it as an agreement to be enforced through

specific performance and could have rejected the petition filed by the

respondent - defendant.       Even as per the pleadings advanced by the

respondent - defendant, she unilaterally issued the notice to the petitioner -

plaintiff cancelling the agreement of sale entered with the petitioner - plaintiff.

Contrary to that, she could not plead in the petition that the document executed

by her was a sale deed which required stamp duty on it. The respondent -

defendant conveniently deviated from her own pleadings in the petition. The

court below ought to have seen that as per the recitals of Ex.A1, the outstanding

                                         7

                                                                          Dr.GRR, J
                                                                      crp_1769_2023

amount of Rs.5,50,000/- of the total sale consideration, had to be paid by the

petitioner - plaintiff, then only, the transaction of sale between them would be

concluded. Once, the court admitted the document and marked it as an exhibit

in the suit, the court could not revert its order without any support of statutory

law or authority. De-exhibiting Ex.A1 by the court below was against the

settled law and procedure contemplated. As per 
Section 36
 of the Stamp Act,

wherein an instrument had been admitted in evidence, such admission shall not,

except as provided under 
Section 61
, be called in question at any stage of the

suit or proceedings on the ground that, the instrument had not been duly

stamped. The court below ignored the above provision and prayed to set aside

the order passed by the Principal District Judge, Hanumakonda in I.A.No.630 of

2023 in O.S.No.188 of 2022 dated 15.06.2023.



9.    Heard the learned counsel for the revision petitioner - plaintiff and the

learned counsel for the respondent - defendant.



10.   As seen from the record, the petition in I.A.No.630 of 2023 in

O.S.No.188 of 2022 was filed by the respondent - defendant under 
Order XIII

Rule 3 of CPC
 read with 
Sections 33
 and 
35
 of the Stamp Act and 
Section 17


and 
49
 of the Registration Act read with 
Section 151
 of CPC for de-exhibiting

Ex.A1 agreement of sale. Thus, this Court does not find any merit in the

contention of the learned counsel for the revision petitioner - plaintiff that the

respondent - defendant filed the petition without support of any provision of

                                            8

                                                                          Dr.GRR, J
                                                                      crp_1769_2023

law under 
the Code of Civil Procedure
 or any supportive statute and the said

petition was liable to be rejected at the threshold.



11.   The other contention taken by the learned counsel for the revision

petitioner - plaintiff was that the respondent - defendant and her advocate failed

to present themselves on the date of marking of document on behalf of the

petitioner - plaintiff as PW.1 and their failure could not be attributed to the

revision petitioner - plaintiff for de-exhibiting the marked exhibit as Ex.A1.



12.   On a perusal of the pleadings, the respondent - defendant in her written

statement itself contended that the said document agreement of sale was barred

by law under 
Section 35
 of the Stamp Act and that the same was compulsorily

registerable under 
Sections 17
 and 
49
 of the Registration Act and it should be

treated as an outright sale deed and stamp duty and penalty should be collected

and that the said document could not be received even in a suit for specific

performance of contract and the same was inadmissible in evidence.               But

ignoring the said contentions, the trial court marked the said document as Ex.A1

on 28.03.2023 in the absence of the defendant or her counsel. The trial court in

its order in I.A.No.630 of 2023 noted that the court did not notice due to

oversight about insufficiency of stamp duty on the said document at the time of

its marking as exhibit and the advocate for plaintiff also did not bring to the

notice of the court about the said fact.

                                              9


                                                                           Dr.GRR, J
                                                                       crp_1769_2023


13.      Notice should be given to the respondent - defendant at the time of filing

of the evidence affidavit of PW.1 and the defendant or her counsel need to be

present at the time of recording the evidence of PW.1 and marking the

documents and they need to raise the necessary objections for marking the

documents. It was not known whether any notice was given to the respondent -

defendant on the chief affidavit of PW.1. The defendant or her counsel failed to

be present at the time of recording the evidence of PW.1 and marking the

documents.        The court itself also need to be careful while marking the

documents and need to look into whether the documents would require any

stamp duty or penalty or they were in accordance with the provisions of law.

When the matter was posted for the cross-examination of PW.1, the respondent


- defendant immediately filed I.A.No.630 of 2023 to de-exhibit Ex.A1 and to

hear with regard to the admissibility of the said document.



14.      The learned counsel for the respondent - defendant placed reliance on the

judgment of the combined High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana in


Syed Yousuf Ali v. Mohd.Yousuf and Others
 1, wherein also it was contended

that when a document is admitted and marked as exhibit, it could not be

questioned except under 
Section 61
 in view of interdict contained under 
Section

36
 of Indian Stamp Act, it was held that:






1


    C.R.P.No.4794 of 2015 dated 05.02.2016

                         10

                                                          Dr.GRR, J
                                                      crp_1769_2023

"16. No doubt, 
Section 36
 of the Act created an
interdict to raise an objection about admissibility
of     document,      once     admitted,    except
under 
Section 61
, it is the duty of the Court to
apply its mind about the admissibility and
determine judicially but the Presiding Officer
failed to look into the admissibility of the
document for want of stamp duty and penalty.

Putting signature on the stamp of marking on the
document cannot be considered as admission of
a document in evidence. When similar issue
came up before Division Bench of this Court in
W.P.No.29434 of 2013, dated 12.02.2014,
placing reliance on judgment of Apex Court
in 
R.V.E.Venkatachala Gounder v. Arulmigu
Viswesaraswami
 [AIR 2003 SC 4548] and
V.P.Temple and another and Ram Rattan
(dead) by legal representatives v. Bajranlal
and others [AIR 1978 SC 1393] drawn
distinction between admitting in evidence and
marking of document. Marking of a document is
only for convenient reference, whereas,
admitting document is taking the document as
evidence after applying judicial mind.
 
In view of
principle 
laid down in
 
R.V.E.Venkatachala
Gounders
 case [AIR 2003 SC 4548] and Ram
Rattan (dead) by LRs case [AIR 1978 SC 1393],
the parties can raise objection as to admissibility
of document and mere marking of document for
convenience of reference would not preclude the
parties to raise objection as to the admissibility.


In 
R.V.E.Venkatachala Gounders
 case [AIR
2003 SC 4548], the Apex Court is of the view
that merely because a document is marked as
exhibit an objection as to its admissibility is not
excluded and is available to be raised even at a
later stage or even in appeal or revision.


Similarly in Ram Rattan's case [AIR 1978 SC
1393], the Supreme Court is of the view that
when the document was tendered in evidence by
the plaintiff while in witness box, objection has
been raised by the defendants that the document
was inadmissible in evidence as it was not only
insufficiently stamped, but also for want of
registration, it was obligatory upon the learned
trial judge to apply his mind to the objection
raised and decide the objection in accordance
with law. Tendency sometimes is to postpone
the decision to avoid interruption in the process

                          11

                                                            Dr.GRR, J
                                                        crp_1769_2023

of recording evidence and therefore, a very
convenient device is resorted to, of marking the
document in evidence subject to objection.
However, would not mean that the objection as
to admissibility on the ground that the
instrument is not duly stamped is judicially
decided; it is merely postponed. In such a
situation at a later stage before the suit is finally
disposed of it would none-the-less be obligatory
upon the Court to decide the objection. The
endorsement made by the learned trial Judge
that objected, allowed subject to objection,
clearly indicates that when the objection was
raised, it was not judicially determined and the
document was tentatively marked and in such a
situation, 
Section 36
 would not attract. Though
facts are different, the law laid down by the
Courts time and again is that to admit a
document in evidence the Court has to apply its
mind and decide the admissibility of document
in evidence, judicially, mere marking for
convenience of reference itself would not
amount to admitting the document by applying
judicial mind and it is not a judicial
determination as to the admissibility of
document in evidence. 
Section 35
 created clear
embargo against acting upon insufficiently
stamped document for any purpose. Any
purpose would include collateral purpose. Even
if both parties gave consent for marking
insufficiently stamped document, it shall not be
act upon, more particularly to enforce the right
of parties under contract of sale, unless it falls
under any clauses of proviso. The present
document does not fall within any of the clauses
of proviso to 
Section 35
 of the Act, when
document shall not be acted upon admitting the
same by consent would mean that it is the duty
of the Court to decide admissibility of document
in evidence judicially.



17. In such situation, the bar under 
Section 36
 of
the Act would not come in the way of the parties
to raise an objection as to the admissibility of
the document. In the present case except affixing
stamp giving numerical number to the
possessory contract of sale as Ex.A.1, signing
thereon by officer, nothing discloses about the
judicial determination of admissibility of

                                                12

                                                                                 Dr.GRR, J
                                                                             crp_1769_2023

                        possessory contract of sale. The provisions
                        of 
Stamp Act
 are fiscal in nature and such
                        provisions have to be construed strictly, at the
                        same time, it is the duty of the office to decide
                        or determine judicially about admissibility of the
                        document, irrespective of objection to avoid loss
                        of revenue to the State. In the absence of any
                        judicial determination about admissibility of the
                        document, the same can be questioned at a later
                        stage though stamp is affixed marking the
                        document as exhibit."





15.      In the present case also, there is no judicial determination about the

admissibility of the document at the time of its marking. As per the judgment of

the Hon'ble Apex Court in 
R.V.E.Venkatachala Gounder v. Arulmigu

Viswesaraswami
 [AIR 2003 SC 4548], merely because the document was

marked as an exhibit, an objection as to its admissibility was not excluded and

the same was available to be raised even at a later stage or even in appeal or

revision.






16.      The learned counsel for the revision petitioner relied upon the judgment

of the Hon'ble Apex Court in 
Sirikonda Madhava Rao v. N.Hemalatha and

Others
 2 on the aspect that once a document has been admitted in evidence, such

admission cannot be called in question at any stage of the suit or proceedings on

the ground that the instrument has not been duly stamped. Objection as to

admissibility of a document on the ground of insufficiency of stamp, has to be

raised when the document is tendered in evidence. Thereafter, it is not open to

the parties, or even to the court to re-examine the order or issue.

2

    2022 Live Law 970

                                           13

                                                                            Dr.GRR, J
                                                                        crp_1769_2023


17.   The judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in 
R.V.E.Venkatachala

Gounder v. Arulmigu Viswesaraswami
 [AIR 2003 SC 4548] was not referred


in 
the above case
. As there was a detailed discussion 
in 
the above case
 by the

Hon'ble Apex Court between admitting a document in evidence and marking of

document and 
the said judgment
 was not considered by the Hon'ble Apex Court

while rendering its order 
in 
the above case
, this Court does not find any merit in

the contention of the learned counsel for the revision petitioner - plaintiff that it

was not open to the parties to re-examine the order or issue with regard to

marking the document as an exhibit.






18.   The High Court of Andhra Pradesh in 
Syed Yousuf Ali
's Case (cited

supra) also held that:






                    "21. When the documents were marked as
                    exhibits in the absence of defendant or his
                    counsel and without considering the nature of
                    the document by the Court, assigning exhibit
                    number cannot be said to be admitted in
                    evidence and interdict contained in 
Section
                    36
 would not come to the aid of the party in
                    whose evidence the document was marked as
                    exhibit without any judicial determination,
                    totally debarring the adversary to challenge the
                    admissibility of document in evidence. 
In
                    Vemireddy Kota Reddy's Case [2004 (3) ALD
                    187], single Judge of this Court relied on 
Javer
                    Chand and others v. Pukhraj Surana
 to
                    conclude that marking of a document is
                    assigning exhibit number without judicial
                    determination would not amount to admitting
                    document in evidence and such objection can be
                    raised at later point of time.




                    22. Whereas, learned counsel for the
                    respondents placed reliance in T.Nagaratnam's

                         14

                                                          Dr.GRR, J
                                                      crp_1769_2023

case [2006 (3) ALD 838], so also
M.Narasimhulu's case [1996 Law Suit (AP)
447] and Isra Fatima's case [2002 Law Suit
832]. In all the three judgments, the single
Judges of this Court decided the bar contained
under 
Section 36
 of Indian Stamp Act holding
that until and unless there is a judicial
determination it cannot be said that it has been
admitted in evidence though it is marked. Mere
marking of document itself is not sufficient and
there should be judicial determination as to the
nature of document and its admissibility. Further
the words admitted in evidence appearing
under 
Section 36
 of the Act means admitted
after judicial consideration of objections relating
to admissibility. In the absence of judicial
determination       marking      of      document
mechanically is an illegality. Even otherwise at
any stage of the suit, the Court may reject any
document which it considers irrelevant or
otherwise inadmissible in view of 
Order 13 Rule
3 CPC
.



24. According to 
Order 13 Rule 3 CPC
 the Court
may at any stage of the suit, reject any document
which it considers irrelevant or otherwise
inadmissible, recording the grounds for such
rejection. 
Order 13 Rule 4 CPC
 prescribes an
endorsement to be made on the document when
a document is admitted in evidence. According
to it, there shall be an endorsement on every
document which has been admitted in evidence
containing number and title of the suit, the name
of the person producing the document, the date
on which it was produced and a statement of its
having been so admitted and the endorsement
shall be signed or initialled by the Judge.



25. Here there is an endorsement on the reverse
of possessory contract of sale consisting the
details under Order 13 Rule 4(1)(A) to (C), 1(D)
is absent. Therefore, the document cannot be
said to be admitted after judicial determination,
in such a case, exercising power under 
Order 13
Rule 3 CPC
, the Court can reject any document
which it considers irrelevant or in-admissible,
recording reasons.

                                          15


                                                                           Dr.GRR, J
                                                                       crp_1769_2023


19.      
In the present case also, as there is no judicial determination about the

admissibility of Ex.A1, this Court agrees with the view taken by the High Court

of Andhra Pradesh in 
Syed Yousuf Ali
's case (cited supra) and finds no merit in

the contention of the learned counsel for the revision petitioner on this aspect.


20.      The other contention raised by the learned counsel for the revision

petitioner was that even though delivery of possession was mentioned in the

document, the agreement of sale would not change its character as a transaction

of sale, as the transaction would be concluded only by execution of regular

conveyance deed. The recitals of the document would show that it was only an

agreement of sale and as such not hit by the language employed in 
Section 17
 of

the Indian Stamp Act and also 
Section 49
 of the Registration Act and relied

upon the judgment of the High Court of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh in


Bhimavarapu Laxma Reddy v. Pallothu Aswini Kumar
 3 on the aspect that

an agreement holder, even if in possession and enjoyment of property, does not

acquire any title to property. Entries in the revenue records whether pursuant to

the mutation or without mutation also do not confer title.





3

    2015 (5) ALD 500

                                             16

                                                                             Dr.GRR, J
                                                                         crp_1769_2023


21.      The learned counsel for the revision petitioner also relied upon the

judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in 
Achal Reddi v. Ramakrishna Reddiar

and Others
 4, wherein also it was held by the Hon'ble Apex Court that:


                      "In the case of an agreement of sale the party
                      who obtains possession, acknowledges title
                      of the vendor even though the agreement of
                      sale may be invalid. It is an
                      acknowledgement and recognition of the
                      title of the vendor which excludes the theory
                      of adverse possession. The well-settled rule
                      of law is that if person is in actual possession
                      and has a right to possession under a title
                      involving a due recognition of the owner's
                      title his possession will not be regarded as
                      adverse in law, even though he claims under
                      another title having regard to the well
                      recognized policy of law that possession is
                      never considered adverse if it is referable to
                      a lawful title. The purchaser who got to
                      possession under an executory contract of
                      sale in a permissible character cannot be
                      heard to contend that his possession was
                      adverse. In the conception of adverse
                      possession there is an essential and basic
                      difference between a case in which the other
                      party is put in possession of property by an
                      outright transfer, both parties stipulating for
                      a total divestiture of all the rights of the
                      transferor in the property, and in case in
                      which, there is a mere executory agreement
                      of transfer both parties contemplating a deed
                      of transfer to be executed at a later point of
                      time. In the latter case the principle of
                      estoppel applies estopping the transferee
                      from contending that his possession, while
                      the contract remained executory in stage,
                      was in his own right and adversely against
                      the transferor. Adverse possession implies
                      that it commenced in wrong and is


4

    AIR 1990 SC 553

                                            17

                                                                           Dr.GRR, J
                                                                       crp_1769_2023

                      maintained against right. When the
                      commencement         and    continuance     of
                      possession is legal and proper, referable to a
                      contract, it cannot be adverse."



22.      Both the above judgments are rendered while considering whether a

purchaser who was put in possession basing on an executory contract of sale

would acquire title over it. These judgments are not relevant for considering

whether the stamp duty is payable or not on the agreement of sale when the

purchaser was put in possession of the property.



23.      The learned counsel for the revision petitioner also relied upon the

judgment of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana in 
Ram Kishan and

Another v. Bijeder Mann @ Vijender Mann and Others
 5, wherein it was

considered that though a purchaser was put in possession by way of agreement

to sell, if the buyer fails to pay the balance sale consideration within the

prescribed time and does not apply for extention of time, the seller would be

entitled to get the contract rescinded and therefore the document cannot be

considered as a sale deed but only an agreement to sell. This judgment is also

not applicable to the facts of this case as it was also not rendered under the

provisions of the 
Stamp Act
.






5

    2015 Law Suit (P&H) 4786

                                              18

                                                                              Dr.GRR, J
                                                                          crp_1769_2023


24.      The other judgment relied by the learned counsel for the revision

petitioner was that of the Hon'ble Apex Court in R.Hemalatha v. Kasthuri 6,

wherein it was held that:





                      "an unregistered document affecting the
                      immovable property and required by the
                      
Registration Act
 or the 
Transfer of Property Act

                      to be registered, may be received as evidence of
                      a contract in a suit for specific performance
                      under Chapter­II of the Specific Relief Act,
                      1877 or as evidence of any collateral transaction
                      not required to be affected by registered
                      instrument as per proviso to 
Section 49
 of the
                      Registration Act. However, the same is subject
                      to 
Section 17 (1A)
 of the Registration Act.



25.      There is no dispute with the proposition laid down by the Hon'ble Apex

Court that as per proviso to 
Section 49
 of the Registration Act, an unregistered

agreement to sell shall be admissible in evidence in a suit for specific

performance and the proviso is exception to the first part of the 
Section 49
. The

said judgment is rendered while considering the effect of Tamilnadu

Amendment by which 
Section 17(1)(g)
 of the Registration Act had been

inserted which makes agreement to sell immovable property valued above

Rs.100/- compulsorily registerable.          The Hon'ble Apex Court held that the

amendment would not affect proviso to 
Section 49
, which allows un-registered

sale agreements to be received in evidence, an un-registered agreement to sell

immovable property can be received in evidence in a suit for specific

performance.



6

    2023 Live Law (SC) 304

                                                19

                                                                                 Dr.GRR, J
                                                                             crp_1769_2023


26.      The only question now to be decided is: whether an agreement to sell

coupled with possession can be received in evidence without payment of the

requisite stamp duty and penalty.





27.      The learned counsel for the respondent on the other hand relied upon the

judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in 
Omprakash v. Laxminarayan and

Others
 7, wherein on similar facts, it was held that:


                       "11. As stated earlier, the plaintiffs filed a suit
                       for specific performance of contract and their
                       case is founded on the agreement to sell
                       executed on 27th December, 2000. The
                       agreement to sell acknowledges payment of the
                       part of consideration money and further giving
                       actual physical possession to the purchaser by
                       the seller. Though the defendants dispute that,
                       but in our opinion, for determination of the
                       question of admissibility of a document, it is the
                       recital therein which shall be decisive. Whether
                       the possession in fact was given or not in terms
                       of the agreement to sell is a question of fact
                       which requires adjudication. But, at the time of
                       considering the question of admissibility of
                       document, it is the recital therein which shall
                       govern the issue. It does not mean that the recital
                       in the document shall be conclusive but for the
                       purpose of admissibility it is the terms and
                       conditions incorporated therein which shall hold
                       the field. Having said that, we proceed to
                       consider as to whether the document in question
                       is "conveyance" within the meaning of 
Section
                       2(10)
 of the Act.



                       12. 
Section 2(10)
 of the Act reads as follows:



                              2. Definitions. - In this Act, unless
                              there is something repugnant in the
                              subject or context, -



7


    (2014) 1 SCC 618

                         20

                                                          Dr.GRR, J
                                                      crp_1769_2023

          (10)"Conveyance"              -

          'Conveyance'       includes   a
          conveyance on sale and every
          instrument by which property,
          whether       movable        or
          immovable, is transferred inter
          vivos and which is not
          otherwise specifically provided
          for by Schedule I;

13. From a plain reading of the aforesaid
provision, it is evident that an instrument by
which movable or immovable property is
transferred, comes within the expression
"conveyance". In the present case, an
immovable property is transferred on payment
of part of the consideration and handing over the
possession of the property.

14. It is relevant here to state that by the Indian
Stamp (Madhya Pradesh Second Amendment)
Act, 1990 (Act No.22 of 1990) few Articles
including 
Article 23
 of Schedule 1-A have been
substituted and Explanation has been added
to 
Article 23.
 The Explanation appended
to 
Article 23
 of Schedule 1-
A of the Stamp
Act
 as substituted by Section (6) of Act 22 of
1990 reads as follows:

       "Explanation.--For the purpose of
       this article, where in the case of
       agreement to sell immovable
       property, the possession of any
       immovable property is transferred to
       the purchaser before execution or
       after execution of, such agreement
       without executing the conveyance in
       respect thereof then such agreement
       to sell shall be deemed to be a
       conveyance and stamp duty thereon
       shall be leviable accordingly:

       Provided that, the provisions
       of Section 47-A shall apply mutatis
       mutandis to such agreement which is
       deemed to be a conveyance as
       aforesaid, as they apply to a
       conveyance under that section:

       Provided    further that where
       subsequently a conveyance is

                         21

                                                       Dr.GRR, J
                                                   crp_1769_2023

       effected in pursuance of such
       agreement of sale the stamp duty, if
       any, already paid and recovered on
       the agreement of sale which is
       deemed to be a conveyance shall be
       adjusted towards the total duty
       leviable on the conveyance, subject
       to a minimum of Rs. 10."

The aforesaid Explanation has come into effect
with effect from 26th September, 1990. The
Explanation, therefore, creates a legal fiction.
The agreement to sell shall be deemed to be a
conveyance and stamp duty is leviable on an
instrument whereby possession has been
transferred. Thus the agreement to sell in
question is a conveyance within the meaning
of 
Section 2(10)
 of the Act and is to be duly
stamped.



15. 
Section 35
 of the Act makes instruments not
duly stamped inadmissible in evidence, the
relevant portion whereof reads as follows:


       "35. Instruments not duly stamped
       inadmissible in evidence, etc.- No
       instrument chargeable with duty
       shall be admitted in evidence for any
       purpose by any person having by law
       or consent of parties authority to
       receive evidence, or shall be acted
       upon, registered or authenticated by
       any such person or by any public
       officer, unless such instrument is
       duly stamped:



       Provided that-



       (a) any such instrument shall be
       admitted in evidence on payment of
       the duty with which the same is
       chargeable or, in the case of an
       instrument insufficiently stamped, of
       the amount required to make up such
       duty, together with a penalty of five
       rupees, or, when ten times the
       amount of the proper duty or

                                              22

                                                                               Dr.GRR, J
                                                                           crp_1769_2023

                             deficient portion thereof exceeds five
                             rupees, of a sum equal to ten times
                             such duty or portion;"



                      16. From a plain reading of the aforesaid
                      provision, it is evident that an authority to
                      receive evidence shall not admit any instrument
                      unless it is duly stamped. An instrument not
                      duly stamped shall be admitted in evidence on
                      payment of the duty with which the same is
                      chargeable or in the case of an instrument
                      insufficiently stamped, of the amount required to
                      make up such duty together with penalty. As we
                      have observed earlier, the deed of agreement
                      having been insufficiently stamped, the same
                      was inadmissible in evidence. The court being
                      an authority to receive a document in evidence
                      to give effect thereto, the agreement to sell with
                      possession is an instrument which requires
                      payment of the stamp duty applicable to a deed
                      of conveyance. Duty as required, has not been
                      paid and, hence, the trial court rightly held the
                      same to be inadmissible in evidence.



28.      The facts of 
the above case
 as well as the reasoning given by the Hon'ble

Apex Court in considering the Stamp (Madhya Pradesh Second Amendment)

Act, 1990 are applicable mutatis mutandis to this case also.



29.      He also relied upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in


Navneetha Lokesh Puthran v. M.Suryanarayana Kalkura and Others
 8 ,

wherein also it was held that:






                      "For the purpose of admissibility of a document
                      it is recitals contained therein that are decisive
                      and not factual situation on ground. Thus, as
                      agreement to sell contained a clear recital that
                      possession had been transferred to buyer, same
                      shall be deemed to be a conveyance for
                      computation of stamp duty under above-said
                      
Article 23
 explanation - contention that


8

    (2020) 19 SCC 8

                                                 23

                                                                                   Dr.GRR, J
                                                                               crp_1769_2023

                       possession in fact not having been delivered to
                       buyer is not relevant for computation of stamp
                       duty.



30.      The Hon'ble Apex Court 
in 
the above case
 held that even though

possession was in fact not delivered to the buyer, it was the recitals of the

document that were decisive for the purpose of admissibility of a document.

The said judgment was rendered under 
Sections 35
, 
33
 and 
38
 and

Schedule 1-A of 
Article 23
 of the Stamp (Madhya Pradesh Second Amendment)

Act, 1990.





31.      The learned counsel for the respondent also relied upon the judgment of

the High Court of Andhra Pradesh in 
K.J.K.Setty v. K.N.Setty
 9, wherein also

possession was delivered basing on an agreement of sale, it was held that:


 
"12. In the present case, suit itself is filed by the
                       respondent/plaintiff for specific performance of
                       a contract and recitals of the document as
                       referred supra clearly shows that there is a
                       clause of executing registered sale deed after
                       receiving Rs.4,00,000/- within three months
                       which itself shows that document is agreement
                       of sale though it is between co-owners wherein
                       there is a recitals with regard to delivery of
                       possession and document, which is an
                       agreement of sale is followed by delivery of
                       possession. This Court in 
Makineni Srinivas
                       Rao and others v. Manthena Prabhakar
                       Reddy
 [2014 (6) AndhLD 261] had an occasion
                       to consider the scope of Explanation I of Article
                       47-
A of Schedule I-A of the Indian Stamp Act,
                       1899
 and opined at Para Nos.7 to 11 which
                       extracted hereunder:




 
"7. Explanation I of Article 47-
A of
                               Schedule I-A of the Act
 envisages


9

    2023 (3) ALT 296

                 24

                                              Dr.GRR, J
                                          crp_1769_2023

that an agreement to sell followed by
or evidencing delivery of possession
of the property agreed to be sold
shall be chargeable as a "Sale". In
the opinion of this Court, the words
"followed by or evidencing delivery
of possession of the property" shall
be construed to mean that delivery of
possession shall be concurrent with
or immediately after the execution of
agreement of sale and the said
provision does not attract a case
where delivery of possession takes
place long time after the execution of
the agreement of sale. The words
"followed by or evidencing delivery
of possession" in Explanation I fell
for consideration of a Division
Bench of this Court in 
B.
Ratnamala v. G.Rudramma
 [1999
(6) ALT 159: 1999 (6) AndhLD
160]. While reading the two phrases
viz., "followed by" and "evidencing"


separately, the Bench held that in the
former case, even in the absence of a
recital in the agreement, the delivery
must be contemporaneous with the
execution of agreement and that
possession should be intimately and
inextricably connected with the
agreement. In the latter case, it held
that in order to attract this
explanation, the agreement must
contain a recital of delivery of
possession either prior to or after the
agreement.



8. On a careful reading of
Explanation I and the Division
Bench judgment in B. Ratnamala
[1999 (6) ALT 159: 1999 (6)
AndhLD 160], I am of the opinion
that in cases where the agreement
does not contain the recital of
delivery of possession, it must be
examined       whether    possession
"followed" the agreement. What
precisely is the meaning of the word
"followed"? The Oxford dictionary,

                 25

                                             Dr.GRR, J
                                         crp_1769_2023

Thesaurus and Word power guide
(Indian edition 2007) explained the
meaning of the word "follow" as
move or travel behind "go along"

"come after in time or order" "be a
logical consequence of" "(follow
through) continue (an action or task
to its conclusion".



9. Thus, in the absence of express
recital in the agreement on delivery
of possession, in order to levy stamp
duty chargeable to conveyance in
respect of an agreement of sale, it
must be shown that possession
followed as a logical consequence of
the agreement. As explained by the
Apex Court in 
Veena Hansmukh
Jain v. State of Maharashtra
, by
introducing Explanation I, the
legislature intended that the stamp
duty as applicable to conveyance
shall be collected in advance where
delivery of possession was involved
at the agreement stage itself and
execution of conveyance deed
remains a mere formality.




10. Where the agreement does not
contain the recital relating to
possession, what needs to be seen is
whether delivery of possession was
in contemplation of the parties at the
time of execution of the agreement
itself. This can be ascertained with
reference to the point of time of such
delivery. If delivery is simultaneous
to or concurrent or contemporaneous
with the execution of agreement of
sale, it can be safely concluded that
the parties have intended delivery of
possession though such a recital is
absent in the agreement. If on the
contrary there is a reasonable time
lag between execution of agreement
and delivery of possession, it cannot
be construed that such delivery
followed the agreement. At best it
amounts to delivery of possession in

                         26

                                                          Dr.GRR, J
                                                      crp_1769_2023

       pursuance of and not following the
       agreement of sale.



       11. In my opinion, the legislature has
       consciously used the restrictive
       expression followed by preceding the
       words An agreement to sell in
       Explanation I. It has not used the
       expansive words such as in
       pursuance of for it evidently wanted
       levying and collection of stamp duty
       chargeable for conveyances only in
       cases where parties to agreement of
       sale intended delivery of possession
       at the agreement stage itself without
       waiting for execution of regular
       conveyance deed. It is trite that
       provisions of a fiscal statute need to
       be strictly construed."



13. The said decision is followed by this Court
in Chunduru Abbaiah ... Petitioner v.

Garlapati Satyanarayana ... Respondent
[2020 (6) ALT 305] though 
the said decision
 it
is held that recitals of agreement of sale shows
that possession was not delivered and ratio in 
the
said decision
 is that if possession is followed by
or evidencing delivery of possession as per the
document, it requires stamp duty under Article
47-
A of Schedule IA of Indian Stamp Act
. This
Court in G.Kiran Kumar .... Petitioner v.

N.Venkateswara Reddy and others ...

Respondent by following Judgment of Hon'ble
Apex Court in C.R.P.No. 2874 of 2017, dated
20.12.2018 following ratio 
laid down by
 Hon'ble
Apex Court in 
Omprakash v. Laxminarayan
and others
 [(2014) 1 SCC 618] and after
elaborately discussing precedent law held that
agreement of sale, which is inadequately
stamped has to be impounded as per provisions
of stamp act.




14. On perusal of recitals of the document which
also contains a recital that a future document can
be executed which shows that transaction of sale
is not completed unless another document is
executed due to that it cannot be said that it is a
unregistered sale deed though it contains recital
with regard to delivery of possession and
document evidencing delivery of property.

                                              27


 
Dr.GRR, J
                                                                               crp_1769_2023

                      Though the document is said to be agreement of
                      sale evidencing delivery of possession which
                      can be treated as "Conveyance", which can be
                      received in evidence in part performance of a
                      contract after collecting stamp duty and penalty
                      as a sale as per Explanation I of Article 47-
A of
                      Schedule I of Indian Stamp Act
. This Court in
                      
Ummadi Subramanyam v. Ekka Dhanamma
                      and another
 [1999 (4) ALT 706] held that
                      proviso of 
section 49
 of Registration Act shows
                      that an unregistered document effecting
                      immovable property though required registration
                      may be received in evidence of a contract in a
                      suit for specific performance after collecting
                      stamp duty and penalty."




32.    In the light of the above judgments, it can be seen that it was the recitals

in the document which are decisive and conclusive of its admissibility. When

the agreement of sale dated 31.10.2007 is considered, clauses 1 to 4 under the

said agreement would disclose that:





1. The vendor hereby agree and promise to sell the schedule mentioned house property to the
purchaser for a total sale consideration of Rs.20,50,000/-.



2. That the vendor had today received a sum of Rs.15,00,000/- in cash from the purchaser
towards the advance sale consideration, the receipt of which the vendor herewith
acknowledge and submit to the purchaser.



3. The purchaser is already in possession of the schedule mentioned house property as tenant
and in view of the payment of considerable big amount of advance sale consideration paid by
the purchaser to the vendor today, hence the vendor is today inducted the purchaser into
possession by virtue of this agreement of sale.



4. The vendor hereby agreed to execute the registration of sale deed by receiving the balance
sale consideration whenever called by the purchaser either in the name of the purchaser or in
the name or names proposed by the purchaser.



33.    Thus, though the purchaser was in possession as a tenant, it was clearly

mentioned that in lieu of receiving a sum of Rs.15,00,000/- out of total sale

consideration of Rs.20,50,000/- i.e.73% of the total sale consideration, the

                                           28

                                                                           Dr.GRR, J
                                                                       crp_1769_2023

vendor inducted the purchaser into possession of the schedule property by virtue

of the agreement of sale.





34.   Schedule 1-
A of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899
 which was applicable to the

State of Andhra Pradesh and Article 47-A, which was inserted by AP Act 17 of

1986 with effect from 16.08.1986, refers to the stamp duty payable for sale as

defined in 
Section 54
 of Transfer of Property Act, 1882 and explanation (I) of it

would read as follows:





                   Article 47-A (Explanation-I) :- An agreement
                   to sell followed by or evidencing delivery of
                   possession of the property agreed to be sold
                   shall be chargeable as a "Sale" under this
                   Article:



                   Provided that, where subsequently a sale deed is
                   executed in pursuance of an agreement of sale as
                   aforesaid or in pursuance of an agreement
                   referred to in Clause (b) of 
Article 6
, the stamp
                   duty, if any, already paid or recovered on the
                   agreement of sale be adjusted towards the total
                   duty leviable on the sale deed.



35.   Thus, the recitals of the document would disclose that the purchaser was

inducted into possession by virtue of the agreement of sale.               As per

Explanation-I of Article 47-A, when the agreement to sell was followed by

delivery of possession, the same was chargeable as a "sale", though a future

document can be executed which shows that the transaction of sale is not

completed, it shall be treated as a conveyance, as the agreement to sell was

followed by delivery of possession.

                                                29


                                                                                 Dr.GRR, J
                                                                             crp_1769_2023


36.       At the time of delivering the order, the learned counsel for the petitioner

filed a citation of the Hon'ble Apex Court in 
Vijay Kumar Goyal (Dead) v.

Neena Rani and Others
 10, wherein possession was not delivered under the

agreement and it was specifically mentioned in the agreement that possession of

the disputed land in question was already with the appellant, the Hon'ble Apex

Court held that:






                       "As per Entry No. 5 (cc) of Schedule 1-A
                       applicable under the State of Punjab, "in the
                       case of agreement to sell followed by or
                       evidencing delivery of possession of the
                       immovable property agreed to be sold", the
                       stamp duty is leviable under Column No. 2 of
                       Entry No. 23 of Schedule 1-A. As observed
                       hereinabove, the plaintiff was already in
                       possession prior to the execution of the aforesaid
                       agreements as per the recitals in the aforesaid
                       two agreements. It is to be noted that even the
                       plaintiff has also not sought the possession in the
                       suit filed by him and has in fact sought the
                       permanent injunction restraining the defendants
                       from interfering in the peaceful possession of
                       the plaintiff and from dispossessing or causing
                       to dispossess the plaintiff from the suit property.



                       5. In view of the above and for the reasons
                       stated above, the order passed by the High Court
                       and that of the Trial Court directing the
                       appellant - original plaintiff to pay the deficient
                       stamp duty with penalty applying Sub-column
                       No. 2 of Column No. 2 of Entry No. 23 of
                       Schedule 1-A as amended by the State of Punjab
                       is unsustainable and the same deserves to be
                       quashed and set aside."



10


     2022 Law Suit (SC) 1104

                                        30

                                                                          Dr.GRR, J
                                                                      crp_1769_2023


37.   But in the present case, though the petitioner - plaintiff was in possession

of the suit property as a tenant, but subsequently after entering into agreement

of sale, it was specifically mentioned that in view of payment of substantial

amount of sale consideration, the vendor inducted the purchaser into possession

by virtue of the agreement of sale. Thus, the possession of the petitioner was

not as a tenant, but as a purchaser by virtue of payment of substantial amount of

sale consideration. The execution of conveyance deed after payment of the

balance sale consideration was a mere formality.        As such, the document

marked under Ex.A1 evidencing delivery of possession of the property requires

stamp duty as per Explanation (I) of Article 47-A of Schedule 1-
A of Indian

Stamp Act, 1889
.





38.   As such, this Court does not find any illegality or material irregularity in

the order and decree of the learned Principal District Judge, Hanumakonda in

de-exhibiting the document marked as Ex.A1 and in impounding the said

document giving a liberty to the plaintiff to get the said document of agreement

of sale marked on paying deficit stamp duty and penalty as required under

Article 47-A of Schedule 1-
A of the Indian Stamp Act, 1889
.



39.   In the result, the Civil Revision Petition is dismissed confirming the order

of the Principal District Judge, Hanumakonda in I.A.No.630 of 2023 in

O.S.No.188 of 2022 dated 15.06.2023. No order as to costs.

                                       31


                                                                        Dr.GRR, J
                                                                    crp_1769_2023

      As a sequel, miscellaneous applications pending in this Revision Petition,

if any, shall stand closed.





                                                ____________________
                                                Dr. G.RADHA RANI, J
Date: 09th October, 2023
Nsk.


