



[Cites 
59
, Cited by 
0
]




Himachal Pradesh High Court


The Chief General Manager vs Sh. Kashmir Singh (Government ... on 2 January, 2025


Author: 
Jyotsna Rewal Dua


Bench: 
Jyotsna Rewal Dua


                                                         ( 2025:HHC:305 )


IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH, SHIMLA
                               Arb. Case No. 581 of 2023 a/w
                               Arb. Case Nos. 582 to 584 of 2023
                               Reserved on: December       13 , 2024
                               Decided on: January       2 , 2025


1. Arb. Case No. 581 of 2023
The Chief General Manager
H.P. Telecom Circle & ors.                         ...Petitioners

                      Versus

Sh. Kashmir Singh (Government Contractor)         ...Respondent


2. Arb. Case No. 582 of 2023
Sh. Kashmir Singh (Government Contractor)
                                                   ...Petitioner
                      Versus

The Chief General Manager
H.P. Telecom Circle & ors.                        ...Respondents


3. Arb. Case No. 583 of 2023
Sh. Kashmir Singh (Government Contractor)
                                                   ...Petitioner
                      Versus

The Chief General Manager
H.P. Telecom Circle & ors.                        ...Respondents


4. Arb. Case No. 584 of 2023

The Chief General Manager
H.P. Telecom Circle & ors.                         ...Petitioners

                      Versus

Sh. Kashmir Singh (Government Contractor)         ...Respondent
                                                                      ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                         2




Coram:

Ms. Justice Jyotsna Rewal Dua, Judge

1

    Whether approved for reporting?      Yes.

For the petitioner         : Mr. Navlesh Verma, Advocate, for the
                             petitioner(s) in Arb. Case Nos. 581 and 584 of
                             2023.

                                Mr. H.S. Rangra, Advocate, for the petitioner(s)
                                in Arb. Case Nos. 582 and 583 of 2023.

For the respondents        :    Mr. H.S. Rangra, Advocate, for the

                                respondent(s) in Arb. Case Nos. 581 and 584


                                2023

                                Mr. Navlesh Verma, Advocate, for the

                                respondent(s) in Arb. Case Nos. 582 and 583

                                of 2023.



Jyotsna Rewal Dua, Judge

Background of the case

             A   dispute       arose   between      Sh.    Kashmir      Singh,     a

Government Contractor and the Telecom Department in relation to

two works awarded to him in Division Mandi Himachal Pradesh. Sh.



Kashmir Singh moved two Arbitration Case Nos. 37 & 38 of 2019

under 
Section 11(6)
 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (in

short 'the Act') for appointment of arbitrator. Considering total value

of claim in both cases at around Rs. 11 lacs, a learned Advocate

was appointed as arbitrator for deciding both the claims. The

arbitrator entered into the references and passed separate awards

in two cases on 11.11.2022 directing the Telecom Department to


1

Whether reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the judgment? Yes.

                                                                 ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                     3




pay Rs. 4,40,521/- alongwith interest @ 6% p.a. from the date of

filing of the claim petition in one claim and Rs. 2,26,554/- in the other

alongwith interest @ 6% p.a. from the date of filing of the claim

petition. Respondents were also directed to refund the security

amount within 30 days failing which interest @ 6% p.a. was

chargeable. Sh. Kashmir Singh filed objections under 
Section 34
 of

the Act before the learned District Judge, Mandi. Learned District

Judge considered the provisions of 
Section 2(1)(e)
, 
Section 11
 &


Section 42
 of the Act, judicial precedents of various Hon'ble High

Courts & Hon'ble Supreme Court              and held that arbitrator was

appointed by the High Court of Himachal Pradesh, which is vested

with original civil jurisdiction, therefore, it will fall within the definition

of 'Court' under 
Section 2(i)(e)
, hence by virtue of 
Section 42
 of the

Act, all subsequent applications are required to be filed before the

High Court and not before the District Court. Accordingly learned

District Judge held that it did not have jurisdiction to entertain the

objections filed by Sh. Kashmir Singh. Objections were ordered to be

returned to him for presentation before the appropriate Court i.e. this

Court. Learned District Judge had also observed that all arbitration

proceedings were conducted at Shimla, therefore, the District Judge

Mandi will have no jurisdiction to entertain the objections.

                                                          ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                  4




          Consequently, these objections i.e. Arbitration Case Nos.



582 & 583 of 2023 have been filed by Sh. Kashmir Singh under


Section 34
 of the Act challenging the awards passed by the learned

arbitrator on 11.11.2022. Counter Arbitration Case Nos. 581 & 584

of 2023 have been filed by the Telecom Department assailing the

same awards passed by the learned arbitrator.



2.        The Point involved

          Before embarking upon merits of the objections, the first

question that needs addressing is: Whether upon appointment of

arbitrator under 
Section 11(6)
 of the Act by the High Court more

particularly where the High Court also exercises original civil

jurisdiction, the objections against the award are to be filed before

the High Court or the District Judge.



          In the instant case, applications under 
Section 11(6)
 of the

Act were moved by Sh. Kashmir Singh in this           Court    seeking

appointment of arbitrator in Arbitration Case Nos. 37 & 38 of 2019.

Sole arbitrator was appointed by the High Court on 02.08.2019. So

whether the High Court which also exercises original civil jurisdiction

has exclusive jurisdiction to entertain objections under 
Section 34
 of

the Act, is the point to be delved upon. Learned Counsel for the

parties have been heard accordingly.

                                                              ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                     5




2(i).      Legal Provisions

 
Sections 42
, 
2(1)(e)
 & 
11
 of the Act have bearing on the

question concerned:-



2(i)(a)    "42. Jurisdiction. - Notwithstanding anything contained
           elsewhere in this Part or in any other law for the time being in
           force, where with respect to an arbitration agreement any
           application under this Part has been made in a Court, that
           Court alone shall have jurisdiction over the arbitral proceedings
           and all subsequent applications arising out of that agreement
           and the arbitral proceedings shall be made in that Court and in
           no other Court."



 
Section 42
 starts with a non-obstante clause i.e.

'notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Part or in any

other law for the time being in force'. The words 'this Part' refers to

Part-I which encompasses 
Sections 1
 - 43. As per 
Section 42
,

where an application with respect to an arbitration agreement under

Part-I has been made to a Court then that Court alone will have the

jurisdiction    over     (a) arbitral proceedings & (b) all subsequent

applications arising       out of that agreement and the            arbitral

proceedings shall be made in that Court and in no other Court.



2(i)(b)    'Court' has been defined in 
Section 2(1)(e)
 of the Act to

mean:-



               2(1)(e)      "Court" means -



               "(i) in the case of an arbitration other than international
               commercial arbitration, the principal Civil Court of original
                                                                 ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                     6




             jurisdiction in a district, and includes the High Court in
             exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having
             jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the subject-

             matter of the arbitration if the same had been the subject-
             matter of a suit, but does not include any Civil Court of a
             grade inferior to such principal Civil Court, or any Court of
             Small Causes;

             (ii)   in the case of international commercial arbitration, the
             High Court in exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction,
             having jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the
             subject-matter of the arbitration if the same had been the
             subject-matter of a suit, and in other cases, a High Court
             having jurisdiction to hear appeals from decrees of courts
             subordinate to that High Court;"





2(1)(c)   
Section 11
 of the Act pertains to appointment of

arbitrators. Relevant portion of this Section is as follows:-



          '11. Appointment of arbitrators.--(1) A person of any nationality
          may be an arbitrator, unless otherwise agreed by the parties.
          (2) Subject to sub-section (6), the parties are free to agree on a
          procedure for appointing the arbitrator or arbitrators.
          (3) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section (2), in an
          arbitration with three arbitrators, each party shall appoint one
          arbitrator, and the two appointed arbitrators shall appoint the
          third arbitrator who shall act as the presiding arbitrator.
          (3A) The Supreme Court and the High Court shall have the
          power to designate, arbitral institutions, from time to time, which
          have been graded by the Council under 
Section 43-I
, for the
          purposes of this Act:

             Provided that in respect of those High Court jurisdictions,
          where no graded arbitral institution are available, then, the
          Chief Justice of the concerned High Court may maintain a panel
          of arbitrators for discharging the functions and duties of arbitral
          institution and any reference to the arbitrator shall be deemed
          to be an arbitral institution for the purposes of this section and
                                                        ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                            7




the arbitrator appointed by a party shall be entitled to such fee
at the rate as specified in the Fourth Schedule:

    Provided further that the Chief Justice of the concerned High
Court may, from time to time, reviews the panel of arbitrators.



 (4) If the appointment procedure in sub-section (3) applies
and--

    (a) a party fails to appoint an arbitrator within thirty days
         from the receipt of a request to do so from the other
         party; or

    (b) the two appointed arbitrators fail to agree on the third
         arbitrator within thirty days from the date of their
         appointment,
the appointment shall be made, on an application of the party,
by the arbitral institution designated by the Supreme Court, in
case of international commercial arbitration, or by the High
Court, in case of         arbitrations other than   international
commercial arbitration, as the case may be.
(5) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section (2), in an
arbitration with a sole arbitrator, if the parties fail to agree on the
arbitrator within thirty days from receipt of a request by one
party from the other party to so agree the appointment shall be
made on an application of the party in accordance with the
provisions contained in sub-section (4).
(6) Where, under an appointment procedure agreed upon by the
parties,--

    (a) a party fails to act as required under that procedure; or

    (b) the parties, or the two appointed arbitrators, fail to reach
        an agreement expected of them under that procedure; or

    (c) a person, including an institution, fails to perform any
        function entrusted to him or it under that procedure,
The appointment shall be made, on an application of the party,
by the arbitral institution designated by the Supreme Court, in
case of international commercial arbitration, or by the High
Court, in case of arbitrations other than international commercial
arbitration, as the case may be to take the necessary measures,
unless the agreement on the appointment procedure provides
other means for securing the appointment.
(6A) xxx xxx
(6B) The designation of any person or institution by the
Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court, for the
purposes of this section shall not be regarded as a delegation of
judicial power by the Supreme Court or the High Court.

(7) - 11(A)       xxx xxx"
                                                                  ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                      8





2(ii)      Comparison of 
Section 11(6)
 as it stood before and after

the amendment of the 
Arbitration and Conciliation               Act, 1996
 on


23.10.2015 (by Act 3 of 2016) , may first be noticed:-



Section 11(6)
 before 2015 amendment.      
Section 11(6)
 after 2015 amendment.

(6) Where, under an appointment           (6) Where, under an appointment
procedure agreed upon by the              procedure agreed upon by the
parties,--                                 parties,--
(a) a party fails to act as required      (a) a party fails to act as required
under that procedure; or                  under that procedure; or
(b) the parties, or the two appointed     (b) the parties, or the two appointed
arbitrators, fail to reach an             arbitrators, fail to reach an
agreement expected of them under          agreement expected of them under
that procedure; or                        that procedure; or

(c) a person, including an institution,   (c) a person, including an institution,
fails to perform any function             fails to perform any function
entrusted to him or it under that         entrusted to him or it under that
procedure,                                procedure,
a party may request the Chief             the appointment shall be made, on
Justice or any person or institution      an application of the party, by the
designated by him to take the             arbitral institution designated by the
necessary measure, unless the             Supreme Court, in case of
agreement on the appointment              international commercial arbitration,
procedure provides other means for        or by the High Court, in case of
securing the appointment.                 arbitrations other than international
                                          commercial arbitration, as the case
                                          may be to take the necessary
                                          measures, unless the agreement on
                                          the appointment procedure provides
                                          other means for securing the
                                          appointment.



           The words 'Chief Justice' existing in 
Section 11 (4)
, (5) &

(6) were substituted with 'Supreme Court' or, as the case may the

'High Court'. The other provisions of 
Section 11
 were also amended

accordingly.

                                                                ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                     9




               Use of the words 'High Court' in 
Section 11(6)
 of the Act

instead       of 'Chief Justice' has given rise to    the question in the

present case that when the appointment of the arbitrator is not by

the Chief Justice but by the High Court of Himachal Pradesh and

incidentally this High Court exercises original civil jurisdiction and

falls within the definition of 'Court' under 
Section 2(1)(e)
 then by

virtue of 
Section 42
 of the Act, objections challenging the arbitral

award should also be filed before this Court.


3.             Legal Position
               The question - Whether appointment of arbitrator by the

Chief Justice under the Act (prior to 2015 amendment) was an

administrative or judicial act came up for consideration in several

cases.



3(i).          
Konkan   Railway   Corpn.   Ltd.   &   others    vs.    Mehul

Construction Co.2
, held that order of appointment of arbitrator

passed under 
Section 11(6)
 was administrative in nature. The Chief

Justice does not function as a Court or a Tribunal. The said order

cannot be subjected to judicial scrutiny of the Supreme Court. The

nature of function performed by the Chief Justice being essentially

to aid, constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal cannot be held to be a

judicial function or      otherwise legislature would    have used         the


2

    (2000) 7 SCC 201
                                                                    ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                         10




words 'Court' or 'a judicial authority' instead of choosing the

expression 'the Chief Justice or his nominee'. Relevant paras from

the judgment are as under:-




                   "4.   ...     ...      In fact a Bench of this Court in
                  Sundaram Finance case3 while considering the scope of
                  
Section 9
 of the Act has approached the problem from this
                  perspective and incidental observation has been made that
                  
Section 11
 does not require the Court to pass a judicial order
                  appointing arbitrator. The nature and function performed by
                  the Chief Justice or his nominee under sub- section (6) of
                  
Section 11
 being essentially to aid the constitution of the
                  arbitral tribunal cannot be held to be a judicial function as
                  otherwise the legislature could have used the expression
                  'court' or 'judicial authority' instead of choosing the
                  expression 'the Chief Justice or his nominee'. If a
                  comparison is made with the 
English Arbitration Act
 1996 it
                  would appear that under the 
English Act
 it is the Court which
                  has been vested with the function of appointment of an
                  arbitrator upon failure of the agreed appointment procedure
                  and an order made by the Court becomes appealable under
                  
Section 11(5)
 whereas under the 
Arbitration and Conciliation
                  Act
 of 1996 in India the power of appointment is vested with
                  the Chief Justice or his nominee.

                  5.     An analysis of different sub-sections of 
Section 11

                  would indicate the character of the order, which the Chief
                  Justice or his nominee passes under Sub-section (6) of
                  
Section 11
. Sub-section (3) and sub-section (4) deals with
                  cases, in which a party fails to appoint an arbitrator or the
                  arbitrators fail to agree on the third arbitrator and thus seeks

3

    (1999) 2 SCC 479
                                                ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                      11




to avoid frustration or unreasonable delay in the matter of
constitution of the arbitral tribunal. It authorises the Chief
Justice of India or the Chief Justice of a High Court
concerned, or any person or institution designated by him to
make the appointment upon request of a party, if the other
party has failed to appoint an arbitrator within thirty days
from the receipt of a request to that end. Sub-
sections 4
, 
5

and 
6
 designedly use the expression 'Chief Justice' in
preference to a Court or other authority as in paragraphs (3)
and (4) of 
Article 11
 of the Model Law, obviously for the
reason that the Chief Justice acting in his administrative
capacity, is expected to act quickly without encroaching on
the requirements that only competent persons are appointed
as arbitrators. Sub-section (4) does not lay down any time
limit within which the Chief Justice or his nominee,
designated by him, has to make the appointment. It however
expects that these functionaries would act promptly. While
sub-sections (4) and (5) deal with removal of obstacles
arising in the absence of agreement between the parties on
a procedure for appointing the arbitrator or arbitrators, sub-
section (6) seeks to remove obstacles arising when there is
an agreed appointment procedure. These obstacles are
identified in Clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub-section(6). Sub-
section(6) provides a cure to these problems by permitting
the aggrieved party to request the Chief Justice or any
person or institution designated by him to take the necessary
measure i.e. to make the appointment, unless the agreement
on the appointment procedure provides other means for
securing the appointment. Sub-section(6), therefore, aims at
removing any dead-lock or undue delay in the appointment
process. This being the position, it is reasonable to hold
                                                                   ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                        12




                  that   while   discharging   the   functions    under     sub-
                  section(6), the Chief Justice or his nominee will be
                  acting in his administrative capacity and such a
                  construction would subserve the very object of the new
                  Arbitration Law.

 
6.     The nature of the function performed by the Chief
                  Justice being essentially to aid the Constitution of the
                  Arbitration Tribunal immediately and the legislature having
                  consciously chosen to confer the power on the Chief Justice
                  and not a Court, it is apparent that the order passed by the
                  Chief Justice or his nominee is an administrative order, as
                  has been held by this Court in Ador Samia case4 and the
                  observations of this Court in 
Sundaram Finance Ltd.3
 case
                  also is quite appropriate and neither of those decisions
                  require any re-consideration. This being the position even an
                  order refusing to appoint an arbitrator will not be amenable
                  to the jurisdiction of this Court under 
Article 136
 of the
                  Constitution. Needless to mention such an order refusing to
                  appoint an arbitrator after deciding the contentious issues
                  would be an act of non-performance of duty and in view of
                  what has been stated earlier the concerned authority could
                  be directed by mandamus to perform its duty."


3(ii)          Konkan Railway Corpn. Ltd. & others2 was approved by

the       Constitution Bench of the Apex Court in 
Konkan Railway

Corporation Ltd. & another vs. Rani Construction Pvt. Ltd.5
 holding

that       nature of function performed by the Chief Justice or his

nominee under 
Section 11(6)
 of the Act is purely administrative. It is


4

    (1999) 8 SCC 572

5

    (2002) 2 SCC 388
                                                           ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                     13




neither judicial       nor quasi judicial. No contentious issue can be

decided while performing functions under 
Section 11(6)
 of the Act.


3(iii)         SBP &     Co. vs. Patel Engineering Ltd. & another6,

overruled 
Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd. vs. Rani Construction

Pvt. Ltd.5
. The majority decision held that under 
Section 11(6)
 there

are       several preliminary matters to be determined by the Chief

Justice or his designate before appointment of an arbitrator viz.

Whether application for appointment       of arbitrator has been moved

before the High Court having jurisdiction; Whether valid arbitration

agreement exists between the parties; Whether dispute between

the parties is arbitrable etc. For deciding these questions before

appointing arbitrator, the Chief Justice or his designate can proceed

either on the basis of affidavits or documents produced or take such

evidence as may be necessary. It was held that once the statute

creates an authority, confers on it power to adjudicate and makes its

decision final on matters to be decided by it, normally, that decision

cannot be said to be purely administrative though power to appoint

arbitrator is not conferred on the Supreme Court or the High Court

but on the Chief Justice of India or the Chief Justice of the High

Court. One possible reason for this is that conferment of power upon

the High Court would be governed by normal procedure of the Court


6

    (2005) 8 SCC 618
                                                              ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                   14




including right of appeal. However this situation is to be avoided

since object of the Act itself is to restrict interference by the Courts.

Therefore, power is conferred on highest judicial authority in the

country & in the states in their capacities as Chief Justices. But the

power so conferred is not as persona designata. The mere fact that

power is conferred upon Chief Justice and not on the Court presided

by him, would not mean that power conferred is only administrative

and not judicial. Relevant paragraphs of the judgment             read as

under:-




 
"9.    Normally, any tribunal or authority conferred with a
             power to act under a statute, has the jurisdiction to satisfy
             itself that the conditions for the exercise of that power
             existed and that the case calls for the exercise of that power.
             Such an adjudication relating to its own jurisdiction which
             could be called a decision on jurisdictional facts, is not
             generally final, unless it is made so by the Act constituting
             the tribunal. Here, sub-section (7) of 
Section 11
 has given a
             finality to the decisions taken by the Chief Justice or any
             person or institution designated by him in respect of matters
             falling under sub-sections (4), (5) and (6) of 
Section 11
.
             Once a statute creates an authority, confers on it power to
             adjudicate and makes its decision final on matters to be
             decided by it, normally, that decision cannot be said to be a
             purely administrative decision. It is really a decision on its
             own jurisdiction for the exercise of the power conferred by
             the statute or to perform the duties imposed by the statute.
             Unless, the authority satisfies itself that the conditions for
                                                     ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                        15




exercise of its power exist, it could not accede to a request
made to it for the exercise of the conferred power. While
exercising the power or performing the duty under 
Section
11(6)
 of the Act, the Chief Justice has to consider whether
the conditions 
laid down by
 the section for the exercise of
that power or the performance of that duty, exist. Therefore,
unaided by authorities and going by general principals, it
appears to us that while functioning under 
Section 11(6)
 of
the Act, a Chief Justice or the person or institution
designated by him, is bound to decide whether he has
jurisdiction, whether there is an arbitration agreement,
whether the applicant before him, is a party, whether the
conditions for exercise of the power have been fulfilled and if
an arbitrator is to be appointed, who is the fit person, in
terms of the provision. 
Section 11(7)
 makes his decision on
the matters entrusted to him, final.


10.   The very scheme, if it involves an adjudicatory
process, restricts the power of the Chief Justice to
designate, by excluding the designation of a non-judicial
institution or a non-judicial authority to perform the functions.
For, under our dispensation, no judicial or quasi-judicial
decision can be rendered by an institution if it is not a judicial
authority, court or a quasi-judicial tribunal. This aspect is
dealt with later while dealing with the right to designate
under 
Section 11(6)
 and the scope of that designation.

11.   The    appointment     of   an   arbitrator    against    the
opposition of one of the parties on the ground that the Chief
Justice had no jurisdiction or on the ground that there was
no arbitration agreement, or on the ground that there was no
dispute subsisting which was capable of being arbitrated
upon or that the conditions for exercise of power under
                                                    ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                       16


Section 11(6)
 of the Act do not exist or that the qualification
contemplated for the arbitrator by the parties cannot be
ignored and has to be borne in mind, are all adjudications
which affect the rights of parties. It cannot be said that when
the Chief Justice decides that he has jurisdiction to proceed
with the matter, that there is an arbitration agreement and
that one of the parties to it has failed to act according to the
procedure agreed upon, he is not adjudicating on the rights
of the party who is raising these objections. The duty to
decide the preliminary facts enabling the exercise of
jurisdiction or power, gets all the more emphasized, when
sub-section (7) designates the order under sub-sections (4),
(5) or (6) a 'decision' and makes the decision of the Chief
Justice final on the matters referred to in that sub-Section.

Thus, going by the general principles of law and the
scheme of 
Section 11
, it is difficult to call the order of
the Chief Justice merely an administrative order and to
say that the opposite side need not even be heard before the
Chief Justice exercises his power of appointing an arbitrator.
Even otherwise, when a statute confers a power or imposes
a duty on the highest judicial authority in the State or in the
country, that authority, unless shown otherwise, has to act
judicially and has necessarily to consider whether his power
has been rightly invoked or the conditions for the
performance of his duty are shown to exist.

...

13.    It is common ground that the Act has adopted the
UNCITRAL      Model    Law    on   International     Commercial
Arbitration. But at the same time, it has made some
departures from the model law. 
Section 11
 is in the place of

Article 11
 of the Model Law. The Model Law provides for the
                                                    ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                        17




making of a request under 
Article 11
 to "the court or other
authority specified in 
Article 6
 to take the necessary
measure". The words in 
Section 11
 of the Act, are "the Chief
Justice or the person or institution designated by him". The
fact that instead of the court, the powers are conferred on
the Chief Justice, has to be appreciated in the context of the
statute. 'Court' is defined in the Act to be the principal civil
court of original jurisdiction of the district and includes the
High Court in exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction.
The principal civil court of original jurisdiction is normally the
District Court. The High Courts in India exercising
ordinary original civil jurisdiction are not too many. So in
most of the States the concerned court would be the District
Court. Obviously, the Parliament did not want to confer the
power on the District Court, to entertain a request for
appointing an arbitrator or for constituting an arbitral tribunal
under 
Section 11
 of the Act. It has to be noted that under

Section 9
 of the Act, the District Court or the High Court
exercising original jurisdiction, has the power to make
interim orders prior to, during or even post arbitration. It
has also the power to entertain a challenge to the award
that may ultimately be made. The framers of the statute
must certainly be taken to have been conscious of the
definition of 'court' in the Act. It is easily possible to
contemplate that they did not want the power under

Section 11
 to be conferred on the District Court or the
High Court exercising original jurisdiction. The intention
apparently was to confer the power on the highest judicial
authority in the State and in the country, on Chief Justices of
High Courts and on the Chief Justice of India. Such a
provision is necessarily intended to add the greatest
                                                 ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                        18




credibility to the arbitral process. The argument that the
power thus conferred on the Chief Justice could not even be
delegated to any other Judge of the High Court or of the
Supreme Court, stands negatived only because of the power
given to designate another. The intention of the legislature
appears to be clear that it wanted to ensure that the power
under 
Section 11(6)
 of the Act was exercised by the highest
judicial authority in the concerned State or in the country.
This is to ensure the utmost authority to the process of
constituting the arbitral tribunal.

...

18.    It is true that the power under 
Section 11(6)
 of the Act
is not conferred on the Supreme Court or on the High Court,
but it is conferred on the Chief Justice of India or the Chief
Justice of the High Court. One possible reason for
specifying the authority as the Chief Justice, could be
that if it were merely the conferment of the power on the
High Court, or the Supreme Court, the matter would be
governed by the normal procedure of that Court,
including the right of appeal and the Parliament
obviously wanted to avoid that situation, since one of
the objects was to restrict the interference by Courts in
the arbitral process. Therefore, the power was conferred
on the highest judicial authority in the country and in
the State in their capacities as Chief Justices. They have
been conferred the power or the right to pass an order
contemplated by 
Section 11
 of the Act. We have already
seen that it is not possible to envisage that the power is
conferred on the Chief Justice as persona designata.
Therefore, the fact that the power is conferred on the Chief
Justice, and not on the court presided over by him is not
                                                               ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                   19




            sufficient to hold that the power thus conferred is merely an
            administrative power and is not a judicial power."

         The conclusions were summed up by the Hon'ble Court in

the following paragraph:-



            "47. We, therefore, sum up our conclusions as follows:

            i)     The power exercised by the Chief Justice of the
                   High Court or the Chief Justice of India under
                   
Section 11(6)
 of the Act is not an administrative
                   power. It is a judicial power.

            ii)    The power under 
Section 11(6)
 of the Act, in its
                   entirety, could be delegated, by the Chief Justice of
                   the High Court only to another judge of that court and
                   by the Chief Justice of India to another judge of the
                   Supreme Court.

            iii)   In case of designation of a judge of the High Court or
                   of the Supreme Court, the power that is exercised by
                   the designated, judge would be that of the Chief
                   Justice as conferred by the statute.

            iv)    The Chief Justice or the designated judge will have
                   the right to decide the preliminary aspects as
                   indicated in the earlier part of this judgment. These
                   will be, his own jurisdiction, to entertain the request,
                   the existence of a valid arbitration agreement, the
                   existence or otherwise of a live claim, the existence of
                   the condition for the exercise of his power and on the
                   qualifications of the arbitrator or arbitrators. The Chief
                   Justice or the judge designated would be entitled to
                   seek the opinion of an institution in the matter of
                   nominating an arbitrator qualified in terms of 
Section
                   11(8)
 of the Act if the need arises but the order
                                                   ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                        20




        appointing the arbitrator could only be that of the
        Chief Justice or the judge designate.

v)      Designation of a district judge as the authority under
        
Section 11(6)
 of the Act by the Chief Justice of the
        High Court is not warranted on the scheme of the Act.

vi)     Once the matter reaches the arbitral tribunal or the
        sole arbitrator, the High Court would not interfere with
        orders passed by the arbitrator or the arbitral tribunal
        during the course of the arbitration proceedings and
        the parties could approach the court only in terms of
        
Section 37
 of the Act or in terms of 
Section 34
 of the
        Act.

vii)    Since an order passed by the Chief Justice of the
        High Court or by the designated judge of that court is
        a judicial order, an appeal will lie against that order
        only under 
Article 136
 of the Constitution of India to
        the Supreme Court.

viii)   There can be no appeal against an order of the
        Chief Justice of India or a judge of the Supreme
        Court designated by him while entertaining an
        application under 
Section 11(6)
 of the Act.

ix)     In a case where an arbitral tribunal has been
        constituted by the parties without having recourse to
        
Section 11(6)
 of the Act, the arbitral tribunal will have
        the jurisdiction to decide all matters as contemplated
        by 
Section 16
 of the Act.

x)      Since all were guided by the decision of this Court in
        
Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd. and Anr. v. Rani
        Construction Pvt. Ltd.5
 and orders under 
Section
        11(6)
 of the Act have been made based on the
        position adopted in that decision, we clarify that
                                                                     ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                          21




                           appointments of arbitrators or arbitral tribunals thus
                           far made, are to be treated as valid, all objections
                           being left to be decided under 
Section 16
 of the Act.


                           As and from this date, the position as adopted in this
                           judgment will govern even pending applications under
                           
Section 11(6)
 of the Act.

                  xi)      Where District Judges had been designated by the
                           Chief Justice of the High Court under 
Section 11(6)
 of
                           the Act, the appointment orders thus far made by
                           them will be treated as valid; but applications if any
                           pending Page 1824 before them as on this date will
                           stand transferred, to be dealt with by the Chief Justice
                           of the concerned High Court or a Judge of that court
                           designated by the Chief Justice.

                  xii)     The decision in Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd.

 
and 
Anr. v. Rani Construction Pvt. Ltd.5
 is
                           overruled."


3(iv)          In Garhwal Mandal Vikas Nigam Ltd. Vs. Krishna Travel

Agency7, the contention raised before the Hon'ble Apex Court was

since the arbitrator had been appointed by the Apex Court, it alone

would have the jurisdiction to decide the objections against the

award. The answer given was that once an arbitrator is appointed

then the appropriate forum for filing and challenging the award will

be the Principal Civil Court of Original Jurisdiction. Parties will

have the right to move under 
Sections 34
 and 
37
 of the Act

accordingly.            In scheme of things if appointment is made by the


7

    (2008) 6 SCC 741
                                                           ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                    22




High Court or the Supreme Court, Principal Civil Court of Original

Jurisdiction remains the same as contemplated under 
Section

2(1)(e)
 of the Act. It was also observed that in case objections to the

award were to lie to High Court/Supreme Court that appointed the

arbitrator that would mean that in every              case the High

Court/Supreme Court will become the Principal Civil Court              of

Original Jurisdiction under 
Section 11(6)
 of the Act. A valuable right

of appeal will be lost. The expression 'court' used in 
Section 34
 of

the Act will have to be understood ignoring the definition of 'court'

in the Act.



 
The Apex Court also affirmed the view taken in 
State of

Goa vs. Western Builders8
 that in case of appointment of arbitrator

by High Court under 
Section 11(6)
, the Principal Civil Court of

Original Jurisdiction remained the District Court and not the High

Court. If arbitrator is appointed by the Supreme Court,               the

objections can be filed before the Principal Civil Court of Original

Jurisdiction as defined in 
Section 2(1)(e)
. It was also held         that

converse position would result in depriving the party of its valuable

right to appeal under 
Section 37
 of the Act. The Court also held that

it was not the intention of the Legislature to make the High Court as

Principal Civil Court of Original Jurisdiction     when    arbitrator is


8

    (2006) 6 SCC 239
                                                                ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                    23




appointed by the High Court under 
Section 11(6)
 of the Act.             Once

an arbitrator is appointed then the appropriate forum for filing the

award and for challenging the same will be the Principal Civil Court

of Original Jurisdiction.




          Relevant paragraphs of the judgment read as under:-

             "8.    Apart from these four cases, which have been brought
             to our notice, the position of law is very clear that in case the
             argument of learned counsel is accepted, that would mean
             that in every case where this court passes an order, be it
             on appeal, from the order passed by the High Court
             under 
Section 11(6)
 of the Arbitration and Conciliation
             Act, 1996, this court will become a Principal Civil Court
             of Original Jurisdiction. If the argument is further taken to
             its logical conclusion that would mean that the parties will
             have to approach this Court by making an application under
             
Section 34
 i.e. for setting aside the award. The expression
             'Court' used in 
Section 34
 of the Act will also have to be
             understood ignoring the definition of '
Court' in the Act
.

 
9.     There is another facet of the problem. The party will
             be deprived of the right to file an appeal under 
Section
             37(i)(b)
 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act. This means
             that a valuable right of appeal will be lost. Therefore, in the
             scheme of things, the submission of the learned counsel
             cannot be accepted. Taking this argument to a further logical
             conclusion, when the appointment is made by the High Court
             under 
Section 11(6)
 of the Conciliation Act, then 
in that case
,
             in every appointment made by the High Court in exercise of
             its power under 
Section 11 (6)
, the High Court will become
             the Principal Civil Court of Original Jurisdiction, as defined in
                                                                  ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                         24


Section 2(1)(e)
 of the 1996 Act. That is certainly not the
                  intention of the legislature. Once an arbitrator is
                  appointed then the appropriate forum for filing the
                  award and for challenging the same, will be the Principal
                  Civil Court of Original Jurisdiction. Thus, the parties will
                  have the right to move under 
Section 34
 of the 1996 Act
                  and to appeal under 
Section 37
 of the 1996 Act.
                  Therefore, in the scheme of things, if appointment is
                  made by the High Court or by this Court, the Principal
                  Civil Court of Original Jurisdiction remains the same as
                  contemplated under 
Section 2(1)(e)
 of the 1996 Act.


 
10.   We further reiterate that the view taken by this Court
                  in 
National Aluminium Co. Ltd. Vs. Pressteel & Fabrications
                  (P) Ltd.9
 and 
State of Goa vs. Western Builders8
        is the
                  correct approach and we reaffirm the view that in case
                  any appointment of arbitrator is made by the High Court
                  under 
Section 11(6)
, the principal Civil Court of Original
                  Jurisdiction remains the District Court and not the High
                  Court. And likewise, if an appointment of the arbitrator is
                  made by this Court
, 
in that case
 also, the objection can only
                  be filed before the Principal Civil Court of Original
                  Jurisdiction as defined in 
Section 2(1)(e)
 of the 1996 Act.


                  Thus, in this view of the matter, we hold that the plea raised
                  by learned counsel for the petitioner that this Court should
                  entertain the award given by the arbitrator appointed by this
                  Court and all objections to at should be disposed of by this
                  Court is inacceptable and consequently, the prayer made in
                  the application is rejected."





9


(2004) 1 SCC 540
                                                                  ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                        25




3(v)           In State of Maharashtra through 
Executive Engineer vs.

Atlanta Limited10
, the Hon'ble Supreme Court considered                
Section

2(1)(e)
 of the Act and said that where the High Court exercised

ordinary civil jurisdiction over a district, the High Court will have

preference to the Principal Civil Court of Original Jurisdiction in that

district. In that case one party had moved under 
Section 34
 before

the District Judge and the other party challenged the award before

the High Court. It was held that 'Court' for the purpose of 
Section 42


will be the High Court and not the District Court. Reasons assigned

inter alia were that firstly inclusion of the High Court in definition of

the 'Court' in 
Section 2(1)(e)
 would become nugatory if the above

conclusion was not accepted as the Principal Civil Court of Original

Jurisdiction would always be court lower in grade than the High

Court. Secondly, it is the superior court exercising orginal jurisdiction

which has been chosen to adjudicate the disputes arising out of

arbitration agreement. Relevant paragraphs of the judgments read

as under:-




                  "32.   All the same, it is imperative for us to determine,
                  which of the above two courts which have been approached
                  by the rival parties, should be the one, to adjudicate upon
                  the disputes raised. For an answer to the controversy in
                  hand, recourse ought to be made first of all to the provisions



10

     (2014) 11 SCC 619
                                                       ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                        26




of the 
Arbitration Act
. On the failure to reach a positive
conclusion, other principles of law, may have to be relied
upon. Having given out thoughtful consideration to the issue
in hand, we are of the view, that the rightful answer can be
determined from 
Section 2(1)(e)
 of the Arbitration Act, which
defines the term "Court". We shall endeavour to determine
this issue, by examining how litigation is divided between a
High Court exercising "ordinary original civil jurisdiction", and
the "principal civil court of original jurisdiction" in a district.

What needs to be kept in mind is, that the High Court of
Bombay is vested with "ordinary original civil jurisdiction"

over the same area, over which jurisdiction is also exercised
by the "principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction" for the
District of Greater Mumbai (i.e. the Principal District Judge,
Greater Mumbai). Jurisdiction of the above two courts on the
"ordinary original civil side" is over the area of Greater
Mumbai. Whilst examining the submissions advanced by the
learned counsel for the appellant under 
Section 15
 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, we have already concluded, that in
the above situation, jurisdiction will vest with the High Court
and not with the District Judge. The aforesaid choice of
jurisdiction has been expressed in 
Section 2(1)(e)
 of the
Arbitration Act, without any fetters whatsoever.

33.    It is not the case of the appellants before us, that
because     of   pecuniary dimensions,         and/or    any    other
consideration(s),    jurisdiction   in   the    two     alternatives
mentioned above, would lie with the Principal District Judge,
Greater Mumbai. Under the scheme of the provisions of the

Arbitration Act
 therefore, if the choice is between the High
Court (in exercise of its "ordinary original civil jurisdiction") on
the one hand, and the "principal civil court of original
                                                                      ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                          27




                  jurisdiction" in the District i.e. the District Judge on the other;
                  
Section 2(1)(e)
 of the Arbitration Act has made the choice in
                  favour of the High Court. This in fact impliedly discloses a
                  legislative intent. To our mind therefore, it makes no
                  difference, if the "principal civil court of original
                  jurisdiction", is in the same district over which the High
                  Court exercises original jurisdiction, or some other
                  district. In case an option is to be exercised between a
                  High    Court     (under     its   "ordinary     original     civil
                  jurisdiction") on the one hand, and a District Court (as
                  "principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction") on the
                  other, the choice under the 
Arbitration Act
 has to be
                  exercised in favour of the High Court.

                  34.    In the present controversy also, we must choose the
                  jurisdiction of one of two courts i.e. either the "ordinary
                  original civil jurisdiction" of the High Court of Bombay; or the
                  "principal civil court of original jurisdiction" in District Thane
                  i.e. the District Judge, Thane. In view of the inferences
                  drawn by us, based on the legislative intent emerging out of
                  
Section 2(1)(e)
 of the Arbitration Act, we are of the
                  considered view, that legislative choice is clearly in favour of
                  the High Court. We are, therefore of the view, that the
                  matters in hand would have to be adjudicated upon by the
                  High Court of Bombay alone."



3(vi)          In 
State of West Bengal & others vs. Associated

Contractors11
, the question of law before                 the Hon'ble Supreme

Court was as to which Court will have the jurisdiction to entertain

and decide applications under 
Section 34
 of the Act. Under 
Section


11

     (2015)
 
1
 SCC 32
                                                          ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                  28




9 of the Act an interim order was passed by the High Court. In an

application under 
Section 11
 of the Act, arbitrator was appointed to

adjudicate the dispute between the parties. An argument was raised

that by virtue of 
Section 42
 of the Act it is only the High Court that

will have jurisdiction to decide the applications under 
Section 34
 of

the Act. Hon'ble Apex Court held that definition of word 'Court' in


Section 2(1)(e)
 of the Act is exhaustive as the Section uses the

expression "means and includes". Under this definition Principal Civil

Court of Original Jurisdiction or the High Court in exercise of its

original civil jurisdiction will be 'Court' as defined under 
Section

2(1)(e)
 of the Court. Apex Court also affirmed the view taken in State

of Maharashtra through Executive Engineer10 and held that            the

expression 'with respect to an arbitration agreement' widens the

scope of 
Section 42
 to include all matters which directly or indirectly

pertain to an arbitration agreement. Applications made to Courts

whether before, during or after arbitral proceedings, made under


Part-I of the Act
, are all covered by 
Section 42
. The essential

ingredient of the Section is that an application under Part-I must be

made in a 'Court'. It was held that 
Section 11
 applications are not to

be moved before the 'court' as defined but before the Chief Justice

either of the High Court or the Supreme Court, as the case may be,

or their delegates. This is despite the fact that the Chief Justice or
                                                            ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                  29




his delegate has now to decide judicially and not administratively.


Section 42
 would not apply to applications made before the Chief

Justice or his delegate for the simple reason that the Chief Justice or

his delegate is not 'court' as defined by 
Section 2(1)(e)
. The Chief

Justice does not represent the High Court. In contrast                  to

applications moved under 
Sections 8
 and 
11
 of the Act, the

applications under 
Section 9
 are moved to the 'court' for passing of

interim orders before or during arbitral proceedings or at any time

after the making of the arbitral award but before its enforcement.

Therefore, they attract   
Section 42
 to preclude the making of all

subsequent applications under Part-I to any court except the court to

which an application has been made under 
Section 9
 of the Act. The

Court gave following reasons for holing that when the Apex Court

appoints   arbitrator it will not be   construed as Court within the

meaning of 
Section 2(1)(e)
:--




            "20. As noted above, the definition of "court" in 
Section
            2(1)(e)
 is materially different from its predecessor contained
            in 
Section 2(c)
 of the 1940 Act. There are a variety of
            reasons as to why the Supreme Court cannot possibly
            be considered to be "court" within the meaning of
            
Section 2(1)(e)
 even if it retains seisin over the arbitral
            proceedings. Firstly, as noted above, the definition is
            exhaustive and recognizes only one of two possible courts
            that could be "court" for the purpose of 
Section 2(1)(e)
.

                                                  ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                       30




Secondly, under the 1940 Act, the expression "civil court"

has been held to be wide enough to include an appellate
court and, therefore would include the Supreme Court as
was held in the two judgments aforementioned under the
1940 Act. Even though this proposition itself is open to
doubt, as the Supreme Court exercising jurisdiction under

Article 136
 is not an ordinary Appellate Court, suffice it to
say that even this reason does not obtain under the present
definition, which speaks of either the Principal Civil Court or
the High Court exercising original jurisdiction. Thirdly, if an
application would have to be preferred to the Supreme Court
directly, the appeal that is available so far as applications
under 
Sections 9
 and 
34
 are concerned, provided for under

Section 37
 of the Act, would not be available. Any further
appeal to the Supreme Court under 
Article 136
 would also
not be available. The only other argument that could possibly
be made is that all definition sections are subject to context
to the contrary. The context of 
Section 42
 does not in any
manner lead to a conclusion that the word "court" in 
Section
42
 should be construed otherwise than as defined. The
context of 
Section 42
 is merely to see that one court alone
shall have jurisdiction over all applications with respect to
arbitration agreements which context does not in any
manner enable the Supreme Court to become a "court"
within the meaning of 
Section 42
. It has aptly been stated
that the rule of forum conveniens is expressly excluded by

section 42
. See: 
JSW Steel Ltd. vs. Jindal Praxair Oxygen
Co.Ltd.
, (2006) 11 SCC 521 at para 59. 
Section 42
 is also
markedly different from 
Section 31(4)
 of the 1940 Act in that
the expression "has been made in a court competent to
entertain it" does not find place in 
Section 42
. This is for the
                                                            ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                  31




            reason that, under 
Section 2(1)(e)
, the competent Court is
            fixed as the Principal Civil Court exercising original
            jurisdiction   or a High Court exercising original civil
            jurisdiction, and no other court. For all these reasons, we
            hold that the decisions under the 1940 Act would not obtain
            under the 1996 Act, and the Supreme Court cannot be
            "court" for the purposes of 
Section 42
."




         It was also held that 
Section 42
 applies to all proceedings

with respect to   arbitration agreements including the applications

made after the final award as under:-



            "21. One other question that may arise is as to whether
            
Section 42
 applies after the arbitral proceedings come to an
            end. It has already been held by us that the expression "with
            respect to an arbitration agreement" are words of wide
            import and would take in all applications made before during
            or after the arbitral proceedings are over. In an earlier
            judgment, Kumbha Mawji v. Dominion of India, AIR 1953 SC
            313, the question which arose before the Supreme Court
            was whether the expression used in 
Section 31(4)
 of the
            1940 Act "in any reference" would include matters that are
            after the arbitral proceedings are over and have culminated
            in an award. It was held that the words "in any reference"

            cannot be taken to mean "in the course of a reference", but
            mean "in the matter of a reference" and that such phrase is
            wide enough and comprehensive enough to cover an
            application made after the arbitration is completed and the
            final Award is made. (See Paras 317-18). As has been
            noticed above, the expression used in 
Section 42
 is wider
                                                                     ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                      32




            being "with respect to an arbitration agreement" and would
            certainly include such applications."




Following conclusions were drawn by the Court:-


            "25. Our conclusions therefore on 
Section 2(1)(e)
 and
            
Section 42
 of the Arbitration Act, 1996 are as follows:

            (a)   
Section 2(1)(e)
 contains an exhaustive definition
                  marking out only the Principal Civil Court of
                  Original Jurisdiction in a district or a High Court
                  having original civil jurisdiction in the State, and
                  no other court as "court" for the purpose of 
Part-I
                  of the Arbitration Act, 1996
.

             (b) The expression "with respect to an arbitration
                  agreement" makes it clear that 
Section 42
 will
                  apply to all applications made whether before or
                  during arbitral proceedings or after an Award is
                  pronounced under Part-I of the 1996 Act.

            (c)   However, 
Section 42
 only applies to applications
                  made under Part-I if they are made to a court as
                  defined. Since applications made under 
Section 8

                  are     made   to        judicial   authorities     and     since
                  applications under 
Section 11
 are made to the
                  Chief    Justice     or     his     designate,    the     judicial
                  authority and the Chief Justice or his designate
                  not being court as defined, such applications
                  would be outside 
Section 42
.

            (d)   
Section 9
 applications being applications made to a
                  court and 
Section 34
 applications to set aside arbitral
                  awards are applications which are within 
Section 42
.

            (e)   In no circumstances can the Supreme Court be
                  "court" for the purposes of 
Section 2(1)(e)
, and
                                                                       ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                            33




                         whether the Supreme Court does or does not
                         retain   seisin     after   appointing     an   Arbitrator,
                         applications will follow the first application made
                         before    either    a   High   Court     having    original
                         jurisdiction in the State or a Principal Civil court
                         having original jurisdiction in the district as the
                         case may be.

                   (f)   
Section 42
 will apply to applications made after the
                         arbitral proceedings have come to an end provided
                         they are made under Part-I.

                    (g) If a first application is made to a court which is neither
                         a Principal Court of original jurisdiction in a district or a
                         High Court exercising original jurisdiction in a State,
                         such application not being to a court as defined would
                         be outside 
Section 42
. Also, an application made to a
                         court without subject matter jurisdiction would be
                         outside 
Section 42
.

                  The reference is answered accordingly."



3(vii).        
Emm Enn Associates vs. Commander Works Engineer
 &

others12 relied upon SBP & Co. Vs. Patel Engg. Ltd. Case6 to hold

that exercise of power under 
Section 11(6)
 is judicial in nature;

While exercising this power, the Chief Justice can examine whether

the claim is live and needs to be adjudicated. In cases of stale

claims the applications can be rejected.




4.             Learned Counsel for the claimant - Sh. Kashmir Singh

falls back upon State of Maharashtra through Executive Engineer


12

     (2016) 13 SCC 61
                                                              ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                    34




vs. Atlanta Ltd. Case10 to support the order passed by the learned

District Judge and submits that this High Court exercises ordinary

original Civil jurisdiction. The arbitrator was appointed by this Court.

Between the High Court that exercises original civil jurisdiction and

the Principal Civil Court of Original Jurisdiction, the choice is to be

exercised in favour of the High Court for filing the objections against

the award passed by the arbitrator as it would make no difference if

the Principal Civil Court of     Original Jurisdiction is    in the same

district over which the High Court       exercises original jurisdiction or

some other district. Learned Counsel for the claimant also pressed

into service the amendment of 
Section 11(6)
 under Act 3 of 2016

that   came into force w.e.f. 23.10.2015 and replaced the words

'Chief Justice' with 'High Court' in case of other than international

commercial arbitration as under:-



             "(6) Where, under an appointment procedure agreed upon
             by the parties,--



             (a)   a party fails to act as required under that procedure; or

             (b)   the parties, or the two appointed arbitrators, fail to
                   reach an agreement expected of them under that
                   procedure; or

             (c)   a person, including an institution, fails to perform any
                   function entrusted to him or it under that procedure,
             The appointment shall be made, on an application of the
             party, by the arbitral institution designated by the Supreme
             Court, in case of international commercial arbitration, or by
             the High Court, in case          of   arbitrations other than
                                                            ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                   35




             international commercial arbitration, as the case may be to
             take the necessary measures, unless the agreement on the
             appointment procedure provides other means for securing
             the appointment."



          Learned Counsel for the Telecom Department outlined the

development of law on the subject and contended that in the instant

cases it is the Principal Civil Court of Original Jurisdiction that ought

to have    decided the objections against the arbitral award          and

prayed for setting    aside the judgments passed by the learned

District Judge. It was submitted that Telecom Department filed its

two Arbitration Cases bearing Nos. 581 & 584 of 2023 in this Court

only to avoid conflicting orders and in light of      impugned orders

passed by the learned District Judge.



5.        Consideration

5(i).     It was by way of Act 3 of 2016 that the words 'Chief Justice

or any person or institution designated by him' in 
Section 11(6)
 of

the Act were substituted by the words 'Supreme Court', or as the

case may be, the 'High Court',          or any person or institution

designated by such Court'.



          It would be appropriate to first examine the reasons for

amending 
Section 11(6)
 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996

by Act 3 of 2016. Report No. 246 of the Law Commission of India,
                                                                ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                     36




the basis for amending the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act
 1996 by

the 
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015
 (3 of 2016)

would be a relevant factor.



5(i)(a)   In para-24 of the report, the Commission proposed

changing the existing scheme of           power of     appointment      being

vested in the 'Chief Justice' to the 'High Court' & the 'Supreme

Court' and clarified that     delegation of power of appointment (as

opposed to a finding regarding the existence/nullity of the arbitration

agreement)    shall not be regarded as a             judicial act. This was

proposed to rationalize the law and provide greater incentive for the

High Court and/or Supreme Court to               delegate the      power of

appointment (being a non-judicial act) to specialized, external

persons or institutions.      The    Commission further recommended

amendment of 
Section 11(7)
 so that the decisions of the High Court

regarding existence/nullity of the arbitration agreement            are final

where the    arbitrator has been appointed and as such are non-

appealable. Para of the report relevant to the context reads as

under:-



             "24. Two further sets of amendments have been proposed
             in this context. First, it is observed that a lot of time is spent
             for appointment of arbitrators at the very threshold of
             arbitration proceedings as applications under 
section 11
 are
             kept   pending for many years. In            this context,    the
                                                                     ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                          37




                  Commission has proposed a few amendments. The
                  Commission has proposed changing the existing scheme of
                  the power of appointment being vested in the "Chief Justice"

 
to the "High Court" and the "Supreme Court" and has
                  expressly   clarified   that   delegation   of   the   power   of
                  "appointment" (as opposed to a finding regarding the
                  existence/nullity of the arbitration agreement) shall not be
                  regarded as a judicial act. This would rationalize the law and
                  provide greater incentive for the High Court and/or Supreme
                  Court to delegate the power of appointment (being a non-
                  judicial act) to specialized, external persons or institutions.
                  The Commission has further recommended an amendment
                  to 
section 11 (7)
 so that decisions of the High Court
                  (regarding existence/nullity of the arbitration agreement) are
                  final where an arbitrator has been appointed, and as such
                  are non-appealable. The Commission further proposes the
                  addition of 
section 11 (13)
 which requires the Court to make
                  an endeavor to dispose of the matter within sixty days from
                  the service of notice on the opposite party."


5(i)(b).       The Law Commission also took note of SBP & Co. Vs.

Patel Engineering Ltd. Case6 wherein power to appoint an arbitrator

under 
Section 11
 had been held to be judicial power and also the

law laid down in 
National Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Boghara Polyfab

Pvt. Ltd.13
, as under:-




                  "30.   After a series of cases culminating in the decision in
                  SBP v Patel Engineering, (2005) 8 SCC 618, the Supreme
                  Court held that the power to appoint an arbitrator under


13

     (2009) 1 SCC 267
                                                                 ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                       38


section 11
 is a "judicial" power. 
The underlying issues in this
            judgment, relating to the scope of intervention, were
            subsequently clarified by Raveendran J. in 
National
            Insurance Co. Ltd. v Boghara Polyfab Pvt. Ltd.
, (2009) 1
            SCC 267, where the Supreme Court laid down as follows -


            "1. The issues (first category) which Chief Justice/his
            designate will have to decide are:

            (a)    Whether     the   party     making   the   application   has
                   approached the appropriate High Court?

            (b) Whether there is an arbitration agreement and whether
                   the party who has applied under 
section 11
 of the Act, is
                   a party to such an agreement?

            2. The issues (second category) which the Chief Justice/his
            designate may choose to decide are:

            (a) Whether the claim is a dead (long barred) claim or a live
                   claim?

            (b)      Whether     the        parties   have    concluded     the
                   contract/transaction by recording satisfaction of their
                   mutual rights and obligation or by receiving the final
                   payment without objection?

            3. The issues (third category) which the Chief Justice/his
            designate should leave exclusively to the arbitral tribunal
            are:

            (a)    Whether a claim falls within the arbitration clause (as
                   for example, a matter which is reserved for final
                   decision of a departmental authority and excepted or
                   excluded from arbitration)?

            (b)    Merits of any claim involved in the arbitration."



         The Law Commission recommended amending 
Sections

8
 and 
11
 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996 observing that
                                                             ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                    39




scope of judicial intervention is only restricted to a situation where

Court/judicial authority finds that arbitration agreement does not exist

or is null & void. Insofar as nature of intervention is concerned, the

Commission recommended that              in the event the Court /judicial

authority is prima facie satisfied against the argument challenging

the arbitration agreement it shall appoint the arbitrator and/or refer

the parties to arbitration, as the case may be. The amendment

envisages    that judicial authority shall not       refer the parties to

arbitration only if it finds that    there     does not exist arbitration

agreement or that it is null & void. If the judicial authority is of the

opinion that prima facie the arbitration agreement exists, the dispute

shall be referred to arbitration and leave the existence of arbitration

agreement to be finally determined by the              Arbitral Tribunal.

However, if the judicial authority concludes        that the   arbitration

agreement does not exist, then the conclusion will be final and not

prima facie. In the event the judicial authority refers the dispute to

arbitration and appoints arbitrator under 
Sections 8
 and 
11


respectively such decision would be final and non-appealable. An

appeal can be maintained under 
Section 37
 only in the event of

refusal to refer the parties to arbitration or refusal to appoint

arbitrator. Relevant paragraph of the report reads as under:-

                                                   ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                        40




"33. It    is   in   this    context,   the   Commission      has
recommended amendments to 
sections 8
 and 
11
 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. The scope of the
judicial intervention is only restricted to situations where the
Court/Judicial Authority finds that the arbitration agreement
does not exist or is null and void. In so far as the nature of
intervention is concerned, it is recommended that in the
event the Court/Judicial Authority is prima facie satisfied
against the argument challenging the arbitration agreement,
it shall appoint the arbitrator and/or refer the parties to
arbitration, as the case may be. The amendment envisages
that the judicial authority shall not refer the parties to
arbitration only if it finds that there does not exist an
arbitration agreement or that it is null and void. If the judicial
authority is of the opinion that prima facie the arbitration
agreement exists, then it shall refer the dispute to arbitration,
and leave the existence of the arbitration agreement to be
finally determined by the arbitral tribunal. However, if the
judicial authority concludes that the agreement does not
exist, then the conclusion will be final and not prima facie.

The amendment also envisages that there shall be a
conclusive determination as to whether the arbitration
agreement is null and void. In the event that the judicial
authority refers the dispute to arbitration and/or appoints an
arbitrator, under 
sections 8
 and 
11
 respectively, such a
decision will be final and non-appealable. An appeal can be
maintained under 
section 37
 only in the event of refusal to
refer parties to arbitration, or refusal to appoint an
arbitrator."

                                                           ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                   41




5(ii)      The High Court in exercise of its original civil jurisdiction

and Principal Civil Court of Original Jurisdiction are 'Court' as

defined in 
Section 2(1)(e)
 of the Act. With respect to an arbitration

agreement 
Section 42
 of the Act delineates jurisdiction of the Court

and states where an application under 
Part-I of the Act
 (i.e. under


Sections 1
 - 43) in relation to an arbitration agreement has been

moved in a Court then that Court alone will have jurisdiction not

only over the arbitral proceedings but also       over all subsequent

applications arising out of that agreement. All arbitral proceedings

can be made in that Court alone.           
Section 42
 applies to all

applications whether made before or during arbitral proceedings or

after an award is pronounced under 
Part-1 of the Act
. The only rider

is that such an application must have been made to a Court as

defined.



5(iii)     In the instant case, application in question was moved

under 
Section 11(6)
 of the Act for appointment of arbitrator.

Application was thus under 
Part-1 of the Act
. The application was

made to the High Court of Himachal Pradesh, which incidentally

also exercises original civil jurisdiction. The High Court of Himachal

Pradesh, therefore, technically falls within the definition of 'Court'

under 
Section 2(1)(e)
 of the Act but the arbitrator was not appointed

by the High Court in exercise of its original civil jurisdiction. The
                                                            ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                   42




appointment was made in exercise of 
Section 11(6)
 of the Act.

Further, the pecuniary limit/ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the

High Court of Himachal Pradesh is over the matters where value

exceeds rupees one crore.



5(iv)     The arbitrator was appointed on 02.08.2019 when the Act

stood amended and the words 'Chief Justice' stood replaced with

the words 'High Court'. Hence appointment of arbitrator was by the

High Court. The object behind replacing the words 'Chief Justice'

with 'High Court' in 
Section 11(6)
 as given by the Law Commission is

that "delegation of the power of 'appointment' as opposed to a

finding regarding the existence/nullity of the arbitration agreement

shall not be regarded as a judicial act". The amendment has been

proposed "for rationalizing the law and providing greater incentive

for the High Court and/or Supreme Court to delegate the power of

appointment 'being a non-judicial act' to specialized, external

persons or institutions". 'In the event the judicial authority refers the

dispute to arbitration and/or appoints an arbitrator under 
Sections 8


and 
11
, such a decision will be final and non-appealable. 
Section

11(7)
 of the Act had also been amended. An appeal can be

maintained under 
Section 37
 only in the event of refusal to refer

parties to arbitration or refusal to appoint an arbitrator'. 
Section

11(7)
, however was omitted by Act 33 of 2019. The arbitrator was
                                                               ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                    43




appointed by the High Court not because this High Court exercises

original civil jurisdiction or in exercise of its original civil jurisdiction

but because of the power given in 
Section 11(6)
 of the Act. In

Garhwal Mandal Vikas Nigam Ltd.7 Hon'ble Apex Court held 'Once

an arbitrator is appointed then the appropriate forum for filing the

award and for challenging the same will be the Principal Civil Court

of Original Jurisdiction. The expression 'Court' used in 
Section 34
 of

the Act will also have to be understood ignoring the definition of

'
Court' in the Act
. Thus the parties will have the right to move under


Section 34
 of the Act and to appeal under 
Section 37
 of the Act.

Therefore, in the scheme of things, if appointment is made by the

High Court or by this Court, the Principal Civil Court of Original

Jurisdiction remains the same as contemplated under 
Section

2(1)(e)
 of the Act.'

5(iv)      Appointing an arbitrator under 
Section 11(6)
 of the Act by

the Court which exercises original civil jurisdiction may not even

otherwise vest the Court with jurisdiction under 
Section 42
 of the Act

to entertain objections under 
Section 34
 of the Act, if the Court does

not have pecuniary jurisdiction to entertain the objections. In the

instant cases, in both the claims put together, the total amount

involved is around Rs. 11 lacs. In M/s Ravi Ranjan Developers Pvt.

                                                            ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                     44




Ltd. vs. Aditya Kumar Chatterjee14, the Supreme Court noted that

"
Section 42
 cannot possibly have any application to an application

under 
Section 11(6)
, which necessarily has to be made before a

High Court.....". This is regardless of whether that High Court has

original jurisdiction to decide suits or jurisdiction related to subject

matter of arbitration. Consequently the definition provided in 
Section

2(1)(e)
 does not directly apply even where appointment of arbitrator

is by a High Court that exercises original jurisdiction.

5(v).          The sum total of above discussion is that the High Court

of Himachal Pradesh, which exercises original civil jurisdiction

cannot be classified as 'Court' for the purpose of 
Section 42
 of the

Arbitration and Conciliation Act when it merely appointed arbitrators

under 
Section 11(6)
 of the Act. 
Section 42
 of the Act will not be

attracted         where High Court of Himachal Pradesh has only

appointed the arbitrator and has not undertaken any other exercise.


6.             The next point to be deliberated upon is which Court will

have the jurisdiction to hear objections against the arbitral awards

involved in the instant case. Learned District Judge Mandi has held

that it will not have any jurisdiction over the objections arising out

of the arbitral awards. I am inclined to agree with this conclusion

drawn by the learned Court.



14


 
2022 SCC Online SC 568
                                                                ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                      45




            In 
Hindustan Construction Company Limited vs. NHPC

Limited
 & another15, contract was executed between the parties at

Faridabad and part of cause of action also arose there. However,

New Delhi was the chosen seat of the parties.
 
Learned Additional

District Judge held that though seat of arbitration was at New Delhi

yet by virtue of BALCO vs. Kaiser Aluminium Technical Services

Inc.16, since both Delhi as well as Faridabad Courts would have

jurisdiction as the contract was executed & part of cause of action

arose in Faridabad, Faridabad Court would have the jurisdiction to

decide all other applications as 
Section 42
 of the Act would kick in.

Relying upon 
BGS SGS Soma JV vs. NHPC17
, Hon'ble Apex Court

held that Courts at New Delhi alone would have jurisdiction for the

purposes of challenge to the award. Relevant paras of the report

read as under:-




 
"3.    This Court in Civil Appeal No. 9307 of 2019 entitled
               
BGS SGS Soma JV vs. NHPC Ltd.17
 delivered a judgment
               on 10.12.2019      i.e. after the impugned judgment was
               delivered, in which reference was made to 
Section 42
 of the
               Act and a finding recorded thus:


 
"59. Equally incorrect is the finding in 
Antrix
                       Corporation Ltd. Vs. Devas Multimedia (P) Ltd.

                       (supra)18 that 
Section 42
 of the Arbitration Act, 1996
                       would be rendered ineffective and useless. 
Section 42


15

   (2020)
 
4
 SCC 310

16

   (2012) 9 SCC 552

17

   (2020) 4 SCC 234

18

   2018 SCC OnLine Del 9338
                                                                            ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                              46




                           is meant to avoid conflicts in jurisdiction of Courts by
                           placing the supervisory jurisdiction over all arbitral
                           proceedings in connection with the arbitration in one
                           Court exclusively. This is why the section begins with
                           a non-obstante clause, and then goes on to state
                           '...where with respect to an arbitration agreement any
                           application under this Part has been made in a
                           Court...' It is obvious that the application made under
                           this part to a Court must be a Court which has
                           jurisdiction to decide such application. The
                           subsequent holdings of this Court, that where a seat
                           is designated in an agreement, the Courts of the seat
                           alone have jurisdiction, would require that all
                           applications under Part I be made only in the Court
                           where the seat is located, and that Court alone then
                           has jurisdiction over the arbitral proceedings and all
                           subsequent applications arising out of the arbitral
                           agreement. So read, 
Section 42
 is not rendered
                           ineffective or useless. Also, where it is found on the
                           facts of a particular case that either no "seat" is
                           designated by agreement, or the so-called "seat" is
                           only a convenient "venue", then there may be several
                           Courts where a part of the cause of action arises that
                           may have jurisdiction. Again, an application under
                           
Section 9
 of the Arbitration Act, 1996 may be
                           preferred before a court in which part of the cause of
                           action arises in a case where parties have not agreed
                           on the "seat" of arbitration, and before 3 such "seat"


                           may have been determined, on the facts of a
                           particular case, by the Arbitral Tribunal under 
Section
                           20(2)
 of the Arbitration Act, 1996. In both these
                           situations, the earliest application having been made
                           to a Court in which a part of the cause of action arises
                           would then be the exclusive Court under 
Section 42
,
                           which would have control over the arbitral
                           proceedings. For all these reasons, the law stated by
                           the Bombay19, 20 and Delhi18 High Courts in this
                           regard is incorrect and is overruled."



 
4.      This was made in the backdrop of explaining para 96
                   of the Balco16 (supra), which judgment read as a whole
                   declares that once the seat of arbitration is designated, such



19


Konkola Copper Mines vs. Stewarts & Lloyds of India Ltd.
 2013 SCC OnLine Bom 777.


20

     Nivaran Solutions vs. Aura Thia Spa Services (P) Ltd., 2016 SCC OnLine Bom 5062.

                                                                    ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                         47




                  clause then becomes an exclusive jurisdiction clause as a
                  result of which only the courts where the seat is located
                  would then have jurisdiction to the exclusion of all other
                  courts.

 
5.   Given the finding in this case that New Delhi was the
                  chosen seat of the parties, even if an application was first
                  made to the Faridabad Court, that application would be
                  made to a court without jurisdiction. This being the case, the
                  impugned judgment is set aside following 
BGS SGS Soma
                  JV17
 (supra), as a result of which it is the courts at New Delhi
                  alone which would have jurisdiction for the purposes of
                  challenge to the Award.


                  6.        As a result of this judgment, the 
Section 34

                  application that has been filed at Faridabad Court will stand
                  transferred to the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi. Any
                  objections taken on the ground that such objection filed
                  under 
Section 34
 is out of time hence cannot be
                  countenanced. The appeal is disposed of accordingly."



               
In 
Inox Renewables Limited vs. Jayesh Electricals

Limited21
 the parties had agreed for holding arbitration at Jaipur.

However, an application for appointment of arbitrator was made

before the High Court of Gujarat. The arbitrator was appointed.

Arbitral proceedings were held at Ahmedabad. The arbitral award

was assailed before the Courts at Vadorara. The jurisdiction of

Courts at Vadodara was unsuccessfully resisted. The matter



21

     (2023) 3 SCC 733
                                                               ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                  48




reached Hon'ble Apex Court. It was held that by mutual agreement

parties had shifted venue/place of arbitration           from Jaipur to

Ahmedabad. The moment seat is chosen as Ahmedabad, it is akin

to an exclusive jurisdiction clause, thereby vesting          the Courts at

Ahmedabad with exclusive jurisdiction to deal with the arbitration. It

was observed as follows:-




            "11. 
In 
BGS SGS
 17 (supra), this Court, after an exhaustive
            review of the entire case law, concluded thus :


                   "32. It can thus be seen that given the new concept of
                   "juridical seat" of the arbitral proceedings, and the
                   importance given by the 
Arbitration Act, 1996
 to this
                   "seat", the arbitral award is now not only to state its
                   date, but also the place of arbitration as determined in
                   accordance with 
Section 20
. However, the definition
                   of "court" contained in 
Section 2(1)(c)
 of the
                   Arbitration Act, 1940, continued as such in the
                   
Arbitration Act, 1996
, though narrowed to mean only
                   principal civil court and the High Court in exercise of
                   their original ordinary civil jurisdiction. Thus, the
                   concept of juridical seat of the arbitral proceedings
                   and its relationship to the jurisdiction of courts which
                   are then to look into matters relating to the arbitral
                   proceedings - including challenges to arbitral awards -
                   was unclear, and had to be developed in accordance
                   with international practice on a case by case basis by
                   this Court.

                   xxx xxx xxx

                   48. The aforesaid amendment carried out in the
                   definition of "Court" is also a step showing the right
                   direction, namely, that in international commercial
                   arbitrations held in India, the High Court alone is to
                   exercise jurisdiction over such proceedings, even
                   where no part of the cause of action may have arisen
                   within the jurisdiction of such High Court, such High
                   Court not having ordinary original jurisdiction. In such
                   cases, the "place" where the award is delivered alone
                   is looked at, and the High Court given jurisdiction to
                   supervise the arbitration proceedings, on the footing
                                                                   ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                        49




                        of its jurisdiction to hear appeals from decrees of
                        courts subordinate to it, which is only on the basis of
                        territorial jurisdiction which in turn relates to the
                        "place" where the award is made. In the light of this
                        important change in the law, 
Section 2(1)(e)(i)
 of the
                        Arbitration Act, 1996 must also be construed in the
                        manner indicated by this judgment.

                        49. Take the consequence of the opposite conclusion,
                        in the light of the facts of a given example, as follows.
                        New Delhi is specifically designated to be the seat of
                        the arbitration in the arbitration clause between the
                        parties. Part of the cause of action, however, arises in
                        several places, including where the contract is
                        partially to be performed, let us say, in a remote part
                        of Uttarakhand. If concurrent jurisdiction were to be
                        the order of the day, despite the seat having been
                        located and specifically chosen by the parties, party
                        autonomy would suffer, which BALCO16 specifically
                        states cannot be the case. Thus, if an application is
                        made to a District Court in a remote corner of the
                        Uttarakhand hills, which then becomes the court for
                        the purposes of 
Section 42
 of the Arbitration Act,
                        1996 where even 
Section 34
 applications have then
                        to be made, the result would be contrary to the stated
                        intention of the parties - as even though the parties
                        have contemplated that a neutral place be chosen as
                        the seat so that the courts of that place alone would
                        have jurisdiction, yet, any one of five other courts in
                        which a part of the cause of action arises, including
                        courts in remote corners of the country, would also be
                        clothed with jurisdiction. This obviously cannot be the
                        case. If, therefore, the conflicting portion of the
                        judgment of BALCO16 in para 96 is kept aside for a
                        moment, the very fact that parties have chosen a
                        place to be the seat would necessarily carry with it the
                        decision of both parties that the courts at the seat
                        would exclusively have jurisdiction over the entire
                        arbitral process.

                        xxx xxx xxx

                        53. In Indus Mobile Distribution (P) Ltd.22, after
                        clearing the air on the meaning of 
Section 20
 of the
                        Arbitration Act, 1996, the Court in para 19 (which has
                        already been set out hereinabove) made it clear that
                        the moment a seat is designated by agreement
                        between the parties, it is akin to an exclusive

22

     (2017) 7 SCC 678
                                           ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                50




jurisdiction clause, which would then vest the courts
at the "seat" with exclusive jurisdiction for purposes of
regulating arbitral proceedings arising out of the
agreement between the parties.

 xxx xxx xxx

82. On a conspectus of the aforesaid judgments, it
may be concluded that whenever there is the
designation of a place of arbitration in an arbitration
clause as being the "venue" of the arbitration
proceedings, the expression "arbitration proceedings"

would make it clear that the "venue" is really the
"seat" of the arbitral proceedings, as the aforesaid
expression does not include just one or more
individual or particular hearing, but the arbitration
proceedings as a whole, including the making of an
award at that place. This language has to be
contrasted with language such as "tribunals are to
meet or have witnesses, experts or the parties" where
only hearings are to take place in the "venue", which
may lead to the conclusion, other things being equal,
that the venue so stated is not the "seat" of arbitral
proceedings, but only a convenient place of meeting.
Further, the fact that the arbitral proceedings "shall be
held" at a particular venue would also indicate that the
parties intended to anchor arbitral proceedings to a
particular place, signifying thereby, that that place is
the seat of the arbitral proceedings. This, coupled with
there being no other significant contrary indicia that
the stated venue is merely a "venue" and not the
"seat" of the arbitral proceedings, would then
conclusively show that such a clause designates a
"seat" of the arbitral proceedings. In an International
context, if a supranational body of rules is to govern
the arbitration, this would further be an indicia that
"the venue", so stated, would be the seat of the
arbitral proceedings. In a national context, this would
be replaced by the 
Arbitration Act, 1996
 as applying
to the "stated venue", which then becomes the "seat"

for the purposes of arbitration.

xxx xxx xxx

98. However, the fact that in all the three appeals
before us the proceedings were finally held at New
Delhi, and the awards were signed in New Delhi, and
not at Faridabad, would lead to the conclusion that
both parties have chosen New Delhi as the "seat" of
arbitration under 
Section 20(1)
 of the Arbitration Act,
                                                   ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                        51




       1996. This being the case, both parties have,
       therefore, chosen that the courts at New Delhi alone
       would have exclusive jurisdiction over the arbitral
       proceedings. Therefore, the fact that a part of the
       cause of action may have arisen at Faridabad would
       not be relevant once the "seat" has been chosen,
       which would then amount to an exclusive jurisdiction
       clause so far as Courts of the "seat" are concerned."



12. This case would show that the moment the seat is
chosen as Ahmedabad, it is akin to an exclusive jurisdiction
clause, thereby vesting the courts at Ahmedabad with
exclusive jurisdiction to deal with the arbitration. However,
learned counsel for the Respondent referred to and relied
upon paragraphs 49 and 71 of the aforesaid judgment.
Paragraph 49 only dealt with the aspect of concurrent
jurisdiction as dealt with in BALCO 16 (supra) which does not
arise on the facts of the present case. Paragraph 71 is
equally irrelevant, in that, it is clear that the parties have, by
mutual agreement, entered into an agreement to substitute
the venue at Jaipur with Ahmedabad as the place/seat of
arbitration under 
Section 20(1)
 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996.

xxx xxx xxx

16. The reliance placed by learned counsel for the
Respondent on Indus Mobile22 (supra), and in particular, on
paragraphs 18 and 19 thereof, would also support the
Appellant's case, inasmuch as the "venue" being shifted
from Jaipur to Ahmedabad is really a shifting of the
venue/place of arbitration with reference to 
Section 20(1)
,
and not with reference to 
Section 20(3)
 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996, as it has been made clear that Jaipur
does not continue to be the seat of arbitration and
                                                              ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                     52




             Ahmedabad is now the seat designated by the parties, and
             not a venue to hold meetings. The learned arbitrator has
             recorded that by mutual agreement, Jaipur as a "venue" has
             gone and has been replaced by Ahmedabad. As clause 8.5
             of the Purchase Order must be read as a whole, it is not
             possible to accept the submission of Shri Malkan that the
             jurisdiction of Courts in Rajasthan is independent of the
             venue being at Jaipur. The two clauses must be read
             together as the Courts in Rajasthan have been vested with
             jurisdiction only because the seat of arbitration was to be at
             Jaipur. Once the seat of arbitration is replaced by mutual
             agreement to be at Ahmedabad, the Courts at Rajasthan are
             no longer vested with jurisdiction as exclusive jurisdiction is
             now vested in the Courts at Ahmedabad, given the change
             in the seat of arbitration."




          In the present case, even though part of cause of action

arose in District Mandi yet all arbitral proceedings were conducted

at Shimla. It is not      the case of either of the parties that any

sitting was held within the jurisdiction of Court of learned District

Judge Mandi. Parties have not even placed on record copy of

agreement to show         that they had agreed for         fixing seat of

arbitration at Mandi. For all these reasons and keeping in view the

law laid down by the Apex Court, District Judge Mandi will not have

jurisdiction over the objections under 
Section 34
 of the Act against

the arbitral awards.

                                                           ( 2025:HHC:305 )

                                  53


7.        Conclusion
          For the foregoing discussion, the judgments passed by the

learned District Judge Mandi on 12.01.2023 in Case Nos. (i)

Objection Pet. No. 02/2022 (Reg. No. 03/2022) and Objection Pet.

No. 03/2022 (Reg. No. 04/2022) are set aside to the extent they hold

that this Court alone will have the jurisdiction to entertain & decide

the objections preferred under 
Section 34
 of the Arbitration and

Conciliation Act against the arbitral awards. It is held that in the

instant case, jurisdiction to decide the objections preferred under


Section 34
 of the Act against the arbitral awards will be before the

Principal Court of original jurisdiction at Shimla.   As a result, Arb.

Case Nos. 582 & 583 of 2023 filed by claimant - Kashmir Singh

and Arb. Cases Nos. 581 & 584 filed by the Telecom Department

are disposed of as not maintainable before this Court. The

petitioners in these cases shall be at liberty to move the appropriate

Court having jurisdiction for filing objections against the arbitral

awards. In case such objections are preferred within two weeks from

today, the same shall be decided in accordance with law.


          Petitions stand disposed of in the aforesaid terms, so also

the pending miscellaneous application(s), if any.



                                         Jyotsna Rewal Dua,
                                                Judge
January 02 , 2025 (PK)
 

