



[Cites 
33
, Cited by 
0
]




Delhi High Court


M/S. M.V. Omni Projects (India) Ltd. vs Union Of India, Through Dy. Chief ... on 4 October, 2024


Author: 
Sachin Datta


Bench: 
Sachin Datta


                          $~1

                          *     IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                          %                                              Date of Decision: 04.10.2024
                          +     ARB.P. 703/2023
                                M/S. M.V. OMNI PROJECTS (INDIA) LTD.                    .....Petitioner

                                                    Through:     Mr. Subodh Kr. Pathak and Mr.
                                                                 Akash Swami, Advocates.

                                                    versus

                                UNION OF INDIA, THROUGH DY.
                                CHIEF ENGINEER/CONST.-II/NORTHERN RAILWAY

                                                                                      .....Respondent
                                                    Through:     Mr. Ruchir Mishra, Mr. Sanjiv Kumar
                                                                 Saxena, Mr. Mukesh Kumar Tiwari
                                                                 and Ms. Poonam Shukla, Advocates.

                                CORAM:
                                HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SACHIN DATTA

                          SACHIN DATTA, J. (Oral)



                          1.    The present petition under 
Section 11(6)
 of the Arbitration and
                          Conciliation Act, 1996, seeks the constitution of an Arbitral Tribunal to
                          adjudicate the disputes between the parties.

                          2.    Disputes between the parties have arisen in the context of a Contract
                          Agreement bearing No.804-A/Cs/Dy.C.E./C-II-LKO dated 16.06.2016
                          entered into between the parties, concerning "Phaphamau-Allahabad
                          Section: Balance earth work in embankment & cutting including mechanical
                          compaction using vibrating roller, laying and compaction of blanketing as




Signature Not Verified


Digitally Signed          ARB.P. 703/2023                                                Page 1 of 23


By:KAMLA RAWAT


Signing Date:13.10.2024


16:15:55

                           per RDSO guidelines for heavy axle load etc. between Km. 144.05 to
                          Km.156.95 (i.e., Phaphamau Railway Station including yard and Allahabad
                          Railway Station excluding yard) in connection with doubling between
                          Phaphamau-Allahabad Section of Lucknow division. (CA No. 74-
                          W/1/1/WA/Misc/LKO dated 16.06.2016)".

                          3.    The relevant contract conditions between the parties contain the
                          following provisions for dispute resolution:

                                 "63. Matters finally determined by the Railway - All disputes and
                                 differences of any kind whatsoever arising out of or in connection with
                                 the contract, whether during the progress of the work or after its
                                 completion and whether before or after the determination of the
                                 contract, shall be referred by the contractor to the GM and the GM
                                 shall within 120 days after receipt of the contractor's representation
                                 make and notify decisions on all matters referred to by the contractor
                                 in writing provided that matters for which provision has been made in
                                 clauses 8, 18, 22(5), 39, 43(2), 45(a), 55, 55-A(5), 57, 57A,61(1),
                                 61(2) and 62(1) to (xiii) (B) of General Conditions of contract or in
                                 any clause of the special conditions of the contract shall be deemed as
                                 'excepted matters' (matters not arbitrable) and decisions of the
                                 Railway authority, thereon shall be final and binding on the
                                 contractor; provided further that 'excepted matters' shall stand
                                 specifically excluded from the purview of the arbitration clause.



                                 64 (1) (i) - Demand for Arbitration

                                 In the event of any dispute or difference between the parties hereto as
                                 to the construction or operation of this contract, or the respective
                                 rights and liabilities of the parties on any matter in question, dispute
                                 or difference on any account or as to the withholding by the Railway
                                 of any certificate to which the contractor may claim to be entitled to,
                                 or if the Railway fails to make a decision within 120 days, then and in
                                 any such case, but except in any of the "excepted matters" referred to
                                 in Clause 63 of these conditions, the contractor, after 120 days but
                                 within 180 days of his presenting his final claim on disputed matters
                                 shall demand in writing that the dispute or difference be referred to
                                 arbitration.



                                 64 (1) (ii) - The demand for arbitration shall specify the matters which
                                 are in question, or subject of the dispute or difference as also the
                                 amount of claim item wise. Only such dispute(s) or difference(s) in



Signature Not Verified


Digitally Signed          ARB.P. 703/2023                                                           Page 2 of 23


By:KAMLA RAWAT


Signing Date:13.10.2024


16:15:55

                                  respect of which the demand has been made, together with counter
                                 claims or set off, given by the Railway, shall be referred to arbitration
                                 and other matters shall not be included in the reference.



                                 64 (1) (ii) - (a) The Arbitration proceedings shall be assumed to have
                                 commenced from the day, a written and valid demand for arbitration
                                 is received by the Railway.



                                 (b) The claimant shall submit his claim stating the facts supporting the
                                 claims along with all the relevant documents and the relief or remedy
                                 sought against each claim within a period of 30 days from the date of
                                 appointment of the Arbitral Tribunal.



                                 (c) The Railway shall submit its defence statement and counter
                                 claim(s), if any, within a period of 60 days of receipt of copy of claims
                                 from Tribunal thereafter, unless otherwise extension has been granted
                                 by Tribunal.



                                 (d) The place of arbitration would be within the geographical limits of
                                 the Division of the Railway where the cause of action arose or the
                                 Headquarters of the concerned Railway or any other place with the
                                 written consent of both the parties.



                                 64 (1) (iii) - No new claim shall be added during proceedings by
                                 either party. However, a party may amend or supplement the original
                                 claim or defence thereof during the course of arbitration proceedings
                                 subject to acceptance by Tribunal having due regard to the delay in
                                 making it.



                                 64 (1) (iv) - If the contractor(s) does/do not prefer his/their specific
                                 and final claims in writing, within a period of 90 days of receiving the
                                 intimation from the Railways that the final bill is ready for payment,
                                 he/they will be deemed to have waived his/their claim(s) and the
                                 Railway shall be discharged and released of all liabilities under the
                                 contract in respect of these claims.



                                 64 (2) - Obligation During Pendancy of Arbitration - Work under the
                                 contract shall, unless otherwise directed by the Engineer, continue
                                 during the arbitration proceedings, and no payment due or payable by
                                 the Railway shall be withheld on account of such proceedings,
                                 provided, however, it shall be open for Arbitral Tribunal to consider
                                 and decide whether or not such work should continue during
                                 arbitration proceedings.



                                 64 (3) (a) (i) - In cases where the total value of all claims in question
                                 added together does not exceed Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees ten lakhs



Signature Not Verified


Digitally Signed          ARB.P. 703/2023                                                            Page 3 of 23


By:KAMLA RAWAT


Signing Date:13.10.2024


16:15:55

                                  only), the Arbitral tribunal shall consist of a sole arbitrator who shall
                                 be a gazetted officer of Railway not below JA grade, nominated by the
                                 General Manager. The sole arbitrator shall be appointed within 60
                                 days from the day when a written and valid demand for arbitration is
                                 received by GM.



                                 64 (3) (a) (ii) - In cases not covered by the clause 64(3) (a)(i), the
                                 Arbitral Tribunal shall consist of a Panel of three Gazetted Rly.
                                 Officers not below JA grade or 2 Railway Gazetted Officers not below
                                 JA Grade and a retired Railway Officer, retired not below the rank of
                                 SAG Officer, as the arbitrators. For this purpose, the Railway will
                                 send a panel of more than 3 names of Gazetted Rly. Officers of one or
                                 more departments of the Rly. which may also include the name(s) of
                                 retired Railway Officer(s) empanelled to work as Railway Arbitrator
                                 to the contractor within 60 days from the day when a written and valid
                                 demand for arbitration is received by the GM. Contractor will be
                                 asked to suggest to General Manager at least 2 names out of the panel
                                 for appointment as contractor's nominee within 30 days from the date
                                 of dispatch of the request by Railway. The General Manager shall
                                 appoint at least one out of them as the contractor's nominee and will,
                                 also simultaneously appoint the balance number of arbitrators either
                                 from the panel or from outside the panel, duly indicating the
                                 'presiding arbitrator' from amongst the 3 arbitrators so appointed.
                                 GM shall complete this exercise of appointing the Arbitral Tribunal
                                 within 30 days from the receipt of thenames of contractor's nominees.
                                 While nominating the arbitrators it will be necessary to ensure that
                                 one of them is from the Accounts department. An officer of Selection
                                 Grade of the Accounts Department shall be considered of equal status
                                 to the officers in SA grade of other departments of the Railway for the
                                 purpose of appointment of arbitrator.



                                 64 (3) (a) (iii) - If one or more of the arbitrators appointed as above
                                 refuses to act as arbitrator, withdraws from his office as arbitrator, or
                                 vacates his/their office/offices or is/are unable or unwilling to perform
                                 his functions as arbitrator for any reason whatsoever or dies or in the
                                 opinion of the General Manager fails to act without undue delay, the
                                 General Manager shall appoint new arbitrator/arbitrators to act in
                                 his/their place in the same manner in which the earlier
                                 arbitrator/arbitrators had been appointed. Such re-constituted
                                 Tribunal may, at its discretion, proceed with the reference from the
                                 stage at which it was left by the previous arbitrator (s).



                                 64 (3) (a) (iv) - The Arbitral Tribunal shall have power to call for
                                 such evidence by way of affidavits or otherwise as the Arbitral
                                 Tribunal shall think proper, and it shall be the duty of the parties



Signature Not Verified


Digitally Signed          ARB.P. 703/2023                                                            Page 4 of 23


By:KAMLA RAWAT


Signing Date:13.10.2024


16:15:55

                                  hereto to do or cause to be done all such things as may be necessary
                                 to enable the Arbitral Tribunal to make the award without any delay.
                                 The Arbitral Tribunal should record day to-day proceedings. The
                                 proceedings shall normally be conducted on the basis of documents
                                 and written statements.



                                 64 (3) (a) (v) - While appointing arbitrator(s) under sub-clause (i), (ii)
                                 & (iii) above, due care shall be taken that he/they is/are not the
                                 one/those who had an opportunity to deal with the matters to which
                                 the contract relates or who in the course of his/their duties as Railway
                                 servant(s) expressed views on all or any of the matters under dispute
                                 or differences. The proceedings of the Arbitral Tribunal or the award
                                 made by such Tribunal will, however, not be invalid merely for the
                                 reason that one or more arbitrator had, in the course of his service,
                                 opportunity to deal with the matters to which the contract relates or
                                 who in the course of his/their duties expressed views on all or any of
                                 the matters under dispute.



                                 64 (3) (b) (i) - The arbitral award shall state item wise, the sum and
                                 reasons upon which it is based. The analysis and reasons shall be
                                 detailed enough so that the award could be inferred there from.



                                 64 (3) (b) (ii) - A party may apply for corrections of any
                                 computational errors, any typographical or clerical errors or any
                                 other error of similar nature occurring in the award and
                                 interpretation of a specific point of award to tribunal within 60 days
                                 of receipt of the award.



                                 64 (3) (b) (iii) - A party may apply to tribunal within 60 days of
                                 receipt of award to make an additional award as to claims presented
                                 in the arbitral proceedings but omitted from the arbitral award.



                                 64(4) In case of the Tribunal, comprising of three Members, any
                                 ruling or award shall be made by a majority of Members of Tribunal.
                                 In the absence of such a majority, the views of the Presiding
                                 Arbitrator shall prevail.



                                 64(5) Where the arbitral award is for the payment of money, no
                                 interest shall be payable on whole or any part of the money for any
                                 period till the date on which the award is made.



                                 64(6) The cost of arbitration shall be borne by the respective parties.
                                 The cost shall inter-alia include fee of the arbitrator(s), as per the
                                 rates fixed by the Railway Board from time to time and the fee shall be
                                 borne equally by both the parties. Further, the fee payable to the




Signature Not Verified


Digitally Signed          ARB.P. 703/2023                                                             Page 5 of 23


By:KAMLA RAWAT


Signing Date:13.10.2024


16:15:55

                                   arbitrator(s) would be governed by the instructions issued on the
                                  subject by Railway Board from time to time irrespective of the fact
                                  whether the arbitrator(s) is/ are appointed by the Railway
                                  Administration or by the court of law unless specifically directed by
                                  Hon'ble court otherwise on the matter.



                                  64(7): Subject to the provisions of the aforesaid 
Arbitration and
                                  Conciliation Act
 1996 and the rules there under and any statutory
                                  modifications thereof shall apply to the arbitration proceedings under
                                  this clause."



                          4.    Disputes have arisen between the parties on account of the alleged
                          hindrances faced by the petitioner during the execution of work such as
                          delayed execution of LHS Bridges by other agencies, delayed Ganga Bridge
                          work by other agencies, delayed relocation of cable junction boxes, non-
                          removable of other existing hindering structures, non-availability of
                          blanketing material, additional tax burden owing to implementation of GST
                          and eventually arbitrary and malafide termination of the contract by the
                          respondent on 31.12.2018.

                          5.    The petitioner invoked the Dispute Resolution Clause vide
                          communication dated 30.09.2022. In the said communication, while setting
                          out the grievances of the petitioner and the claims sought to be raised by the
                          petitioner upon the respondent, it was inter-alia sought as under:

                                  "Also, as per modified clause 64 of GCC-2014, the Company is
                                  submitting herewith duly signed Annexure-XV of modified clause 64 of
                                  GCC-2014. The Company further request Railways to refer the
                                  dispute to the independent arbitrator, who shall be appointed with the
                                  mutual consent of both the parties."



                          6.    In response, the respondent addressed a communication dated
                          15.03.2023 to the petitioner, inter-alia, stating:

                                  "Reference above, the General Manager, Northern Railways, Baroda
                                  House, New Delhi has nominated a panel of following four Retired
                                  Gazetted officers to suggest at least two names out of panel by you so




Signature Not Verified


Digitally Signed          ARB.P. 703/2023                                                          Page 6 of 23


By:KAMLA RAWAT


Signing Date:13.10.2024


16:15:55

                                  that G.M. will nominate one out of them to act as
                                 Arbitrator/Contractor's nominee. In above referred Arbitration case:



                                 1.    Shri Arunendera Kumar, Retd. CRB/Railway Board

                                 2.    Shri Alok Ranjan, AM/CE, Railway Board

                                 3.    Ms. Saroj Rajware, Retd. AM/Budger, Railway Board

                                 4.    Shri Anirudh Jain, Retd. AM/Works, Railway Board

                                 It is therefore requested to suggest at least two names out of the above
                                 panel within 15 days positively, so that further action can be taken
                                 into the matter accordingly."



 
7.    The petitioner vide communication dated 29.03.2023 stated that the
                          aforesaid suggestion of the respondent, and the appointment procedure
                          sought to be followed was not in accordance with the judgments of Supreme
                          Court in 
TRF Limited v. Energo Engineering Projects Ltd.
 (
2017) 8 SCC
                          377, Bharat Broadband Network Limited v. United Telecoms Limited
 2019
                          SCC OnLine SC 547 and Delhi High Court judgment in 
Gangotri
                          Enterprises vs. General Manager, Northern Railway
 (2022) DHC 004520.
                          The petitioner accordingly suggested the names of three persons, one of
                          whom could act as the petitioner's nominee. The petitioner also requested
                          that one of the persons named by the respondent in its communication dated
                          15.03.2023 not be appointed as a co-arbitrator or a presiding arbitrator since
                          the said person was already acting as the presiding arbitrator/co-arbitrator in
                          three other railway arbitrations. Finally, it was stated in the communication
                          dated 29.03.2023 that "in case this is not acceptable to you, we will be
                          constrained to take legal action as per 
section 11
 of Indian Arbitration and
                          Conciliation Act, 1996".


                          8.    Instead of paying heed to and responding to the petitioner's
                          communication dated 29.03.2023, the respondent addressed another
                          communication dated 10.04.2023, reproducing the contents of its earlier



Signature Not Verified


Digitally Signed          ARB.P. 703/2023                                                           Page 7 of 23


By:KAMLA RAWAT


Signing Date:13.10.2024


16:15:55

                           communication dated 15.03.2023 verbatim. In response, the petitioner
                          addressed a communication dated 11.05.2023, suggesting the names of its
                          nominee arbitrators as per the appointment procedure insisted upon by the
                          respondent.

                          9.    Subsequently, the arbitral tribunal came to be constituted, and the
                          same was intimated to the petitioner vide communicated dated 24.05.2023,
                          which inter-alia records as under:

                                 "The General Manager, Northern Railway, Baroda House, New Delhi
                                 appointed the Arbitral Tribunal consisting of following members, to
                                 settle the disputes arising out of the subject contract."



                          10.   It is also notable that while constituting the arbitral tribunal, the
                          respondent did not refer all of the claims sought to be raised by the
                          petitioner to arbitration; some of the claims were excluded from the purview
                          of arbitration. This was ostensibly on the basis that the said claims fell
                          within the "scope of excepted matters".

                          11.   In the circumstances, the present petition has been filed by the
                          petitioner seeking constitution of an independent arbitral tribunal. Although
                          the prayer in the present petition, as initially framed, raises a grievance as
                          regards exclusion of certain claims from the purview of arbitration and seeks
                          reference of the said claims to the arbitral tribunal as already constituted,
                          during the course of arguments learned counsel for the petitioner has
                          strenuously contended that the procedure envisaged under Clause 63 and
                          Clause 64 of GCC is not a valid appointment procedure, and therefore an
                          independent arbitral tribunal is required to be constituted to adjudicate the
                          disputes between the parties.

                          12.   Vide order dated 25.08.2023, this Court recorded the contention of




Signature Not Verified


Digitally Signed          ARB.P. 703/2023                                                      Page 8 of 23


By:KAMLA RAWAT


Signing Date:13.10.2024


16:15:55

                           learned counsel for the petitioner as under:

 
"Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the arbitration
                                  agreement, as incorporated in Clause 64 of the Indian Railway
                                  General Conditions of Contract, 1999, enables the respondent to
                                  appoint a panel of three Gazetted railway Officers as members of the
                                  Arbitral Tribunal. He submits that the same is not in consonance with
                                  law and is inoperable in view of the judgment of this Court in 
Margo
                                  Networks Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Railtel Corporation of India Ltd.
 (2023 SCC
                                  OnLine Del 3906).




                                  It is further submitted that the petitioner raised serious objection/s to
                                  the constitution of the arbitral tribunal, as constituted vide
                                  communication dated 24.05.2023. It is submitted that an independent
                                  arbitral tribunal is required to be constituted to adjudicate the dispute
                                  between the parties in view of the settled legal position in a catena of
                                  cases.



                                  In the circumstances, the petitioner does not press Prayer A in the
                                  present petition; and seeks that an independent arbitral tribunal be
                                  constituted to adjudicate all the claims of the petitioner."



                          13.   Subsequently, an affidavit dated 29.04.2024 has also come to be filed
                          on behalf of the petitioner in these proceedings wherein it has been, inter-
                          alia, stated as under:

                                "4. That I say, by way of the instant petition I pray to this Hon'ble court for
                                appointment of the independent arbitral tribunal for adjudication of the
                                disputes as detailed out in the instant petition rather than referring the claims
                                to the existing arbitral tribunal which is constituted against principles of law.



                                5. That I say, my Ld. Counsel upon my instruction has maintained the same
                                stand before the Hon'ble Court which finds mentioned in the order dated
                                25.08.2023 as passed by this Hon'ble Court in the instant petition. Copy of
                                the order dated 25.08.2023 as passed by this Hon'ble Court in the instant
                                petition is being annexed herewith and marked as Document-2."



                          14.   Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that Clause-63 and Clause-
                          64 of the GCC have been the subject matter of examination in numerous
                          judicial pronouncements. It has been held that the procedure contemplated
                          therein for constituting a tribunal does not meet the requirements of law.



Signature Not Verified


Digitally Signed          ARB.P. 703/2023                                                             Page 9 of 23


By:KAMLA RAWAT


Signing Date:13.10.2024


16:15:55


                           Consequently, while dealing with the petition under 
Section 11
 of the
                          Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, this Court and also several other
                          High Courts have appointed independent Arbitral Tribunals in identical
                          context.

                          15.   
In this regard, reliance has been placed on the judgments in the case
                          of 
Margo Networks Pvt. Ltd. &Anr. v. Railtel Corporation of India Ltd.
,
                          2023:DHC:4596 and Gangotri Enterprises Ltd. v. General Manager
                          Northern Railway (Supra).


 
16.   On the contrary, learned counsel for the respondent has contended
                          that the arbitral tribunal having already been constituted, there is no
                          occasion for this Court to substitute/appoint another tribunal to adjudicate
                          the disputes between the parties. Further, it is contended that the respondent
                          has not referred certain claims to arbitration since the same fall in the
                          category of 'excepted matters'. Learned counsel for the respondent has
                          relied upon the cases of M/s 
Emaar India Ltd. v. Tarun Aggarwal Projects
                          LLP &Anr.
 2022 
SCC OnLine SC 1328, Mitra Guha Builders (India)
                          Company v. Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited
 (
2020) 3 SCC 222
                          and General Manager, Northern Railway & Anr. v. Sarvesh Chopra

                          (2002) 4 SCC 45, to justify the same.




                          REASONS AND CONCLUSION:



                          17.   At the outset, it is noted that this Court has had occasion to examine
                          the validity of the procedure for appointment/constitution of an arbitral
                          tribunal in the backdrop of contractual stipulations identical to those in the
                          present case.

                          18.   
In the case of 
Margo Networks Pvt. Ltd.
 (Supra), it has been held



Signature Not Verified


Digitally Signed          ARB.P. 703/2023                                                  Page 10 of 23


By:KAMLA RAWAT


Signing Date:13.10.2024


16:15:55

                           that:


 
(i)         In the context of appointment procedure contemplating
                                  appointment out of panel of arbitrators maintained by one of the
                                  contracting parties, it is mandatory that the panel should be sufficiently
                                  broad-based, failing which the appointment procedure does not meet
                                  with the requirements of law, and in such a situation an independent
                                  arbitral tribunal is required to be appointed by this Court. 
Referring to
                                  Voestalpine Schienen Gmbh vs. Delhi Metro Rail Corporation
                                  Ltd
, (2017) 4 SCC 665, held that an arbitrator panel must be broad-


                                  based and not restrictive. This requirement was not fulfilled when the
                                  panel was comprised solely of ex-employees of a party.

                                  (ii)        A valid appointment procedure must be balanced and not
                                  confer excessive say or authority on one of the parties to the arbitration
                                  regarding the constitution of the arbitral tribunal. An appointment
                                  procedure that contemplates that one party appoints two out of three
                                  members of the arbitral tribunal contravenes this requirement.

                          19.      In the present case, the procedure contemplated under Clauses 63 and
                          64 for appointing/constituting an arbitral tribunal is also vulnerable on both
                          the above counts.

 
20.      The relevant observations made by this Court in 
Margo Networks
                          Pvt. Ltd.
 (Supra) are as follows:


 
"35. Thus, in an appointment procedure involving appointment from a
                                        panel made by one of the contracting parties, it is mandatory for the
                                        panel to be sufficiently broad based, in conformity with the principle
                                        
laid down in
 
Voestalpine
 (supra), failing which, it would be incumbent
                                        on the Court, while exercising jurisdiction under 
Section 11
, to
                                        constitute an independent and impartial Arbitral Tribunal as
                                        mandated in 
TRF
 (supra) and Perkins (supra). The judgement of the
                                        Supreme Court in CORE does not alter the position in this regard.




Signature Not Verified


Digitally Signed          ARB.P. 703/2023                                                                Page 11 of 23


By:KAMLA RAWAT


Signing Date:13.10.2024


16:15:55


                                  36. 
In the facts of the present case, applying the principles laid down
                                 in 
Voestalpine
 (supra) and in view of the aforesaid judgments of this
                                 Court, including in 
L&T Hydrocarbon Engineering Limited
 (supra), it
                                 is evident that the panel offered by the respondent to the petitioner in
                                 the present case is restrictive and not broadbased. The same
                                 adversely impinges upon the validity of the appointment procedure
                                 contained in clause 3.37 (supra), and necessitates that an
                                 independent Arbitral Tribunal be constituted by this Court.




                                 37. This brings us to the next issue that arises in the context of the
                                 arbitration clause in the present case, viz. whether "counter
                                 balancing" is achieved in a situation where one of the parties has a
                                 right to choose an arbitrator from a panel whereas 2/3rd of the
                                 members of the arbitral tribunal are appointed by the other party.



                                                                   ***


                                 42. .... The "counter balancing" as contemplated in Perkins (supra)
                                 cannot be said to have been achieved in a situation where one of the
                                 parties has a right to choose an arbitrator from a panel and where
                                 the remaining (2 out of 3) arbitrators are appointed by the other
                                 party."



 
21.   The observations made in 
Margo Networks Pvt. Ltd.
 (Supra) have
                          been referred with approval by this Court in 
Taleda Square Private Limited
                          v. Rail Land Development Authority
 2023 SCC OnLine Del 6321, Kalyan
                          Toll Infrastructure Ltd v. Union of India and Others 2024 SCC OnLine
                          Del 1525 and Techno Compact Builders through Mr. Zulfiquar Ali, Sole
                          Proprietor v. RAILTEL Corporation of India Limited, 2024 SCC OnLine
                          Del 2166.


 
22.   Consequently, in terms of the said judgment in 
Margo Networks Pvt.
                          Ltd.
 (Supra) and other judgments of the Coordinate Bench of this Court, it is
                          incumbent on this Court to appoint an independent arbitral tribunal to
                          adjudicate the disputes between the parties.


                          23.   Learned counsel for the petitioner has also drawn attention to the fact
                          that in identical context, this Court, having found that the appointment



Signature Not Verified


Digitally Signed          ARB.P. 703/2023                                                           Page 12 of 23


By:KAMLA RAWAT


Signing Date:13.10.2024


16:15:55

                           procedure did not meet the requirements of law, appointed a Sole Arbitrator
                          to adjudicate the disputes between the parties. 
In this regard, reference may
                          be made to 
S.N. Naik & Brothers v. Union of India
 2024 SCC OnLine
                          Bom 995, wherein, it has been observed as under :-


                                 "18. Thus, in the case of CORE (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court has
                                 applied the above clause 64(3)(b)(ii) and held that the High Court could
                                 have not appointed independent sole arbitrator. 
However, in the case of
                                 CORE (supra)as discussed hereinafter, the Hon'ble Supreme Court was
                                 not called upon to decide whether clause 64(3)(b)(ii) is in confirmity of
                                 principles laid down in 
TRF
 (supra) i.e. whether the arbitral panel is
                                 broad based and in Perkins (supra), more particularly, whether the
                                 counter balance is achieved in appointing the arbitral panel.
 
The
                                 Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of CORE (supra) has not whittled
                                 down the principles laid down in 
TRF and Perkins
 (supra).
 The issues
                                 answered in the judgment of CORE (supra) are, whether the retired
                                 railway officers are eligible to be appointed as arbitrators and whether
                                 the General Manager is eligible to nominate the arbitrators.



                                 19 In Tantia Constructions (supra) the Hon'ble Supreme Court has
                                 doubted the view taken in the case of CORE (supra) observing that once
                                 the appointing authority itself is incapcity from referring the matter to
                                 arbitrator it does not follow that notwithstanding this yet appointments
                                 may be valid depending upon the facts of the case. However, CORE
                                 (supra), has not dealt with the issue of counter balance achieved in terms
                                 of Perkins (supra). As such, the law laid down in the judgment of CORE
                                 (supra) is limited to the issues answered in CORE (supra). The same is
                                 the view taken by the Delhi High Court in the below discussed judgments.



                                                xxx               xxx                     xxx


 
23. I am in respectful agreement with the view expressed by the Delhi
                                 High Court in the case of 
Gangotri
 (supra) and 
Ganesh Engineering

                                 (supra) that the judgment of CORE (supra) of the Hon'ble Supreme
                                 Court does not deal with the issue, whether the arbitral panel appointed
                                 is broad based in confirmity with voelstapine (supra) and whether the
                                 counter balancing is achieved as laid down in Perkins (supra). Coming
                                 to the facts of the present case, 2/3 arbitral panel is appointed by the
                                 respondent so also for the 3rd member of the arbitral tribunal 4 names
                                 are suggested by the respondent from which the petitioner is required to
                                 choose 2 names and from the 2 names chosen by the petitioner, the
                                 respondent will appoint one. Thus, the respondent has a complete say in
                                 the appointment of the tribunal.




Signature Not Verified


Digitally Signed          ARB.P. 703/2023                                                          Page 13 of 23


By:KAMLA RAWAT


Signing Date:13.10.2024


16:15:55


                                  24. Having considered the law on the subject the question as raised at
                                 para 8(1) can be answered as under:-



 
Clause 64(3)(b)(ii) of the General Conditions of Contract provides
                                 for unilateral appointment of arbitral tribunal at the hands of one of the
                                 parties and, thus, is in violation of the principles laid down in
                                 
Voestalpine
 (supra), 
TRF
 (supra) and Perkins (supra) and also in
                                 violation of the law laid down in the case of Lombard (supra) and the
                                 said clause is ex-faice invalid and the tribunal constituted thereunder is
                                 non-est and void ab initio.




                                            xxx                 xxx                   xxx


                                 29. In view of this, in exercise of the powers under 
section 11(6)
 of the
                                 Arbitration Act, I appoints Hon'ble Shri Naresh H. Patil (Retired Chief
                                 Justice, Bombay High Court) as sole arbitrator in the matter to decide
                                 the disputes arising between the parties in terms of agreement dated
                                 23.09.2019. The sole arbitrator's fees shall be governed by the Bombay
                                 High Court (Fee Payable to Arbitrators) Rules, 2018."



                          24.   Also, a Coordinate Bench of this Court in M/S Twenty-Four Secure
                          Services Pvt. Ltd. v. M/S Competent Automobiles Company Limited
                          2024/DHC/4601, observed as under -

                                 "22. 
In 
Union of India (UOI) vs. Singh Builders Syndicate
 (2009) 4 SCC
                                 523, the High Court rejected the contention on behalf of the Government
                                 that the Court was not vested with any powers to appoint a Sole
                                 Arbitrator in distinction to the Arbitration Agreement which provided for
                                 the Tribunal of three members. The Apex Court upheld the order of this
                                 Court appointing a Sole Arbitrator by observing that the appointment of
                                 the Sole Arbitrator was valid.




                                 23. In view of the submissions made as well as Clause 7 of the Services
                                 Agreement dated 16.08.2021 which provides for arbitration and the
                                 petitioner has raised the arbitrable disputes and without prejudice to the
                                 rights and contentions of the parties, the present petition is allowed.... "



                          25.   There is also no merit in the contention that the present petition is not
                          maintainable because an arbitral tribunal already stands constituted in terms
                          of the contractual provisions. It has been consistently held in a series of




Signature Not Verified


Digitally Signed          ARB.P. 703/2023                                                          Page 14 of 23


By:KAMLA RAWAT


Signing Date:13.10.2024


16:15:55

                           judgments that where the appointment procedure is invalid, any proceedings
                          before an improperly constituted arbitral tribunal are non-est, and the same
                          would not preclude this Court from exercising jurisdiction under 
Section 11

                          of the A&C Act, 1996.

                          26.   
In 
J. S. R. Constructions v. National Highways Authority of India
                          and Anr.
, 2023: DHC: 8641, this Court has observed as under -


                                 "19. In answer to question (ii), this Court finds that the present petition
                                 is maintainable. There is no merit in the argument of the respondents that
                                 since an Arbitral Tribunal has been constituted to adjudicate the disputes
                                 between the parties, the present petition is not maintainable. In Perkins
                                 (supra), the Supreme Court in exercise of the powers under 
Section 11(6)

                                 of the A&C Act, appointed a Sole Arbitrator, even when appointment of
                                 an Arbitrator was already made; the Supreme Court, inter-alia, held as
                                 under:



                                     "26. The further question that arises is whether the power can be
                                     exercised by this Court under 
Section 11
 of the Act when the
                                     appointment of an arbitrator has already been made by the
                                     respondent and whether the appellant should be left to raise
                                     challenge at an appropriate stage in terms of remedies available
                                     in law. Similar controversy was gone into by a Designated Judge
                                     of this Court in Walter Bau AG and the discussion on the point
                                     was as under : (SCC pp. 805-06, paras 9-10)
                                       "9. While it is correct that in Antrix and Pricol Ltd., it was
                                       opined by this Court that after appointment of an arbitrator
                                       is made, the remedy of the aggrieved party is not under
                                       
Section 11(6)
 but such remedy lies elsewhere and under
                                       different provisions of the 
Arbitration Act
 (
Sections 12
 and

                                       13), the context in which the aforesaid view was expressed
                                       cannot be lost sight of. In Antrix, appointment of the
                                       arbitrator, as per the ICC Rules, was as per the alternative
                                       procedure agreed upon, whereas in Pricol Ltd., the party
                                       which had filed the application under 
Section 11(6)
 of the
                                       Arbitration Act had already submitted to the jurisdiction of
                                       the arbitrator. In the present case, the situation is
                                       otherwise.

                                       10. Unless the appointment of the arbitrator is ex facie valid
                                       and such appointment satisfies the Court exercising
                                       jurisdiction under 
Section 11(6)
 of the Arbitration Act,




Signature Not Verified


Digitally Signed          ARB.P. 703/2023                                                           Page 15 of 23


By:KAMLA RAWAT


Signing Date:13.10.2024


16:15:55

                                       acceptance of such appointment as a fait accompli to debar
                                      the jurisdiction under 
Section 11(6)
 cannot be
                                      countenanced in law. In the present case, the agreed upon
                                      procedure between the parties contemplated the
                                      appointment of the arbitrator by the second party within 30
                                      days of receipt of a notice from the first party. While the
                                      decision in Datar Switchgears Ltd. may have introduced
                                      some flexibility in the timeframe agreed upon by the parties
                                      by extending it till a point of time anterior to the filing of the
                                      application under 
Section 11(6)
 of the Arbitration Act, it
                                      cannot be lost sight of that in the present case the
                                      appointment of Shri Justice A.D. Mane is clearly contrary
                                      to the provisions of the Rules governing the appointment of
                                      arbitrators by Icadr, which the parties had agreed to abide
                                      by in the matter of such appointment. The option given to
                                      the respondent Corporation to go beyond the panel
                                      submitted by Icadr and to appoint any person of its choice
                                      was clearly not in the contemplation of the parties. If that
                                      be so, obviously, the appointment of Shri Justice A.D. Mane
                                      is non est in law. Such an appointment, therefore, will not
                                      inhibit the exercise of jurisdiction by this Court under
                                      
Section 11(6)
 of the Arbitration Act. It cannot, therefore, be
                                      held that the present proceeding is not maintainable in law.

                                      The appointment of Shri Justice A.D. Mane made beyond 30
                                      days of the receipt of notice by the petitioner, though may
                                      appear to be in conformity with the law laid down in Datar
                                      Switchgears Ltd., is clearly contrary to the agreed
                                      procedure which required the appointment made by the
                                      respondent Corporation to be from the panel submitted by
                                      Icadr. The said appointment, therefore, is clearly invalid in
                                      law."



 
27. It may be noted here that the aforesaid view of the Designated
                                    Judge in Walter Bau AG was pressed into service on behalf of the
                                    appellant in TRF Ltd. and the opinion expressed by the Designated
                                    Judge was found to be in consonance with the binding authorities
                                    of this Court. It was observed : (
TRF
 case, SCC p. 397, paras 32-


 
33)

                                       "32. Mr Sundaram, learned Senior Counsel for the appellant
                                      has also drawn inspiration from the judgment passed by the
                                      Designated Judge of this Court in Walter Bau AG, where the
                                      learned Judge, after referring to Antrix Corpn. Ltd.,
                                      distinguished the same and also distinguished the authority in
                                      
Pricol Ltd. v. Johnson Controls Enterprise Ltd.
 and came to



Signature Not Verified


Digitally Signed          ARB.P. 703/2023                                                              Page 16 of 23


By:KAMLA RAWAT


Signing Date:13.10.2024


16:15:55

                                        hold that : (Walter Bau AG case, SCC p. 806, para 10)


                                            10. Unless the appointment of the arbitrator is ex facie valid
                                            and such appointment satisfies the Court exercising
                                            jurisdiction under 
Section 11(6)
 of the Arbitration Act,
                                            acceptance of such appointment as a fait accompli to debar
                                            the jurisdiction under 
Section 11(6)
 cannot be
                                            countenanced in law....


                                     33. We may immediately state that the opinion expressed in the
                                     aforesaid case is in consonance with the binding authorities we
                                     have referred to hereinbefore."



                                    28. In TRF Ltd., the Managing Director of the respondent had
                                    nominated a former Judge of this Court as sole arbitrator in
                                    terms of the aforesaid Clause 33(d), after which the appellant had
                                    preferred an application under 
Section 11(5)
 read with 
Section
                                    11(6)
 of the Act. The plea was rejected by the High Court and the
                                    appeal therefrom on the issue whether the Managing Director
                                    could nominate an arbitrator was decided in favour of the
                                    appellant as stated hereinabove. As regards the issue about fresh
                                    appointment, this Court remanded the matter to the High Court
                                    for fresh consideration as is discernible from para 55 of the
                                    judgment. In the light of these authorities there is no hindrance in
                                    entertaining the instant application preferred by the applicants.

                                                        xxx               xxx                    xxx

                                    30. In the aforesaid circumstances, in our view a case is made out
                                    to entertain the instant application preferred by the applicants.
                                    We, therefore, accept the application, annul the effect of the letter
                                    dated 30-7- 2019 issued by the respondent and of the appointment
                                    of the arbitrator...."



                                 20. 
In 
BVSR-KVR v. Rail Vikas Nigam Ltd.
, 2020 SCC OnLine Del 456
                                 this Court has held as under:




                                    "26. Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, the foremost
                                    issue, which has arisen for consideration is whether, as submitted
                                    by Mr. Seth, this petition is not maintainable as there is already an
                                    Arbitral Tribunal in place.

                                                        xxx               xxx                    xxx

 
33. Mr. Seth has also relied upon the judgment of the Supreme
                                    Court in 
Grid Corpn. of Orissa Ltd.
 (supra) to contend that once
                                    Arbitral Tribunal has come into existence a petition under Section




Signature Not Verified


Digitally Signed          ARB.P. 703/2023                                                            Page 17 of 23


By:KAMLA RAWAT


Signing Date:13.10.2024


16:15:55

                                     11(6) of the Act was not an appropriate remedy and it was upon for
                                    the party to raise objections as to the constitution and jurisdiction
                                    of the Arbitral Tribunal itself under the provisions of the Act.




 
34. Similarly, he had also relied upon the judgment of this Court in
                                    
Newton Engineering & Chemicals
 (supra) to contend that there
                                    was no provision under the Act empowering the Court to terminate
                                    the mandate of the Arbitrator appointed in terms of the agreement
                                    between the parties and the remedy to any challenge against the
                                    appointment of Arbitrator was under 
Section 13
 of the Arbitration
                                    and Conciliation Act before the Arbitrator.
 I am not in agreement
                                    with the submissions made by Mr. Seth by relying upon aforesaid
                                    two judgments for the simple reason that in Perkins Eastman
                                    Architects DPC (supra), the Supreme Court while dealing with an
                                    application under 
Section 11(6)
 read with 
Section 11(12)(a)
 of the
                                    Act of 1996 held that as per the scheme of 
Section 11
 of the Act, if
                                    there are justifiable doubts as to the independence and impartiality
                                    of the persons nominated, and if other circumstances warrant
                                    appointment of an independent Arbitrator by ignoring the
                                    procedure prescribed, such appointment can be made by the Court.



                                    35. If that be so, there is no impediment for this Court to appoint an
                                    independent Arbitrator for adjudicating the dispute and difference
                                    between the parties...."



                                 21. In view of the aforesaid, there is no impediment in entertaining the
                                 present petition. This Court therefore annuls the effect of the letter dated
                                 12.07.2023 issued by the respondent no.1; and the letter dated
                                 19.07.2023 issued by the presiding arbitrator, whereby it was purported
                                 to be informed that the Arbitral Tribunal stood constituted."



 
27.   A Division Bench of this Court in 
Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd. v.
                          Narendra Kumar Prajapat
, 2023 SCC OnLine Del 3148, has also held that
                          an arbitral tribunal, which inherently lacks jurisdiction, cannot validly
                          conduct any arbitral proceedings. It was observed therein as under:




                                 "4. 
In 
TRF Ltd. v. Energo Engineering Projects Ltd.
, (2017) 8 SCC
                                 377, the Supreme Court held that once the Arbitrator has become
                                 ineligible by operation of law, he cannot nominate another as an
                                 arbitrator.
 
In 
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC v. HSCC (India)
                                 Ltd.
, (2020) 20 SCC 760, the Supreme Court, following the earlier
                                 decision in 
TRF Ltd.
 (supra), held that the Chairman-cum-Managing



Signature Not Verified


Digitally Signed          ARB.P. 703/2023                                                            Page 18 of 23


By:KAMLA RAWAT


Signing Date:13.10.2024


16:15:55

                                  Director of a party was ineligible to appoint an arbitrator.
 
Following
                                 the aforesaid decisions, this court in 
Proddatur Cable TV Digi
                                 Services v. Siti Cable Network Limited
, (2020) 267 DLT 51 held that it
                                 is not permissible for a party to unilaterally appoint an arbitrator
                                 without the consent of the other party(ies). It is important to note that
                                 the aforesaid decisions were rendered in the context of 
Section 12(5)

                                 of the A&C Act.


                                                              ***

                                 14. This Court finds no infirmity with the aforesaid view. A person
                                 who is ineligible to act an Arbitrator, lacks the inherent jurisdiction to
                                 render an Arbitral Award under the A&C Act. It is trite law that a
                                 decision, by any authority, which lacks inherent jurisdiction to make
                                 such a decision, cannot be considered as valid. Thus, clearly, such an
                                 impugned award cannot be enforced."



 
28.   There is also no merit in the respondent's contention that certain
                          claims are not liable to be referred to arbitration because they fall within the
                          scope of excepted matters. Whether or not any particular claim is precluded
                          from arbitration on account of being an excepted matter is an aspect that can
                          be gone into by a duly constituted arbitral tribunal. Reference in this regard
                          is apposite to 
N.K. Sharma v. General Manager Northern Railway
 2023
                          SCC OnLine Del 7576 wherein it was observed as under -




 
"This Court has also perused the invocation letter dated 01.06.2022
                                 and prima facie, none of the claims raised therein falls within
                                 'excepted matters'. However, this aspect would require an in depth
                                 examination of the factual matrix which can be done by a duly
                                 constituted Arbitral Tribunal, as contemplated in the judgment of the
                                 Supreme Court in 
Vidya Drolia v. Durga Trading Corpn.
, (2021) 2
                                 SCC 1."




                          29.   Also, in Interplay between Arbitration Agreements under the
                          
Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996
 & the 
Indian Stamp Act, 1899
, In re,
                          2023 SCC OnLine SC 1666, the Supreme Court has reiterated that the scope
                          of inquiry in a petition under 
Section 11
 of the A&C is limited to
                          examination of the existence of an arbitration agreement. It has been



Signature Not Verified


Digitally Signed          ARB.P. 703/2023                                                             Page 19 of 23


By:KAMLA RAWAT


Signing Date:13.10.2024


16:15:55

                           observed therein as follows:



                                 "G. The doctrine of competence-competence

                                 ...



                                 162. The legislature confined the scope of reference under 
Section
                                 11(6A)
 to the examination of the existence of an arbitration
                                 agreement. The use of the term "examination" in itself connotes that
                                 the scope of the power is limited to a prima facie determination. Since
                                 the Arbitration Act is a self-contained code, the requirement of
                                 "existence" of an arbitration agreement draws effect from 
Section 7

                                 of the Arbitration Act. In DuroFelguera (supra), this Court held that
                                 the referral courts only need to consider one aspect to determine the
                                 existence of an arbitration agreement - whether the underlying
                                 contract contains an arbitration agreement which provides for
                                 arbitration pertaining to the disputes which have arisen between the
                                 parties to the agreement. Therefore, the scope of examination under
                                 
Section 11(6A)
 should be confined to the existence of an arbitration
                                 agreement on the basis of 
Section 7
. Similarly, the validity of an
                                 arbitration agreement, in view of 
Section 7
, should be restricted to the
                                 requirement of formal validity such as the requirement that the
                                 agreement be in writing. This interpretation also gives true effect to
                                 the doctrine of competence-competence by leaving the issue of
                                 substantive existence and validity of an arbitration agreement to be
                                 decided by arbitral tribunal under 
Section 16
. 
We accordingly clarify
                                 the position of law laid down in 
Vidya Drolia
 (supra) in the context of
                                 
Section 8
 and 
Section 11
 of the Arbitration Act.




                                 163. The burden of proving the existence of arbitration agreement
                                 generally lies on the party seeking to rely on such agreement. In
                                 jurisdictions such as India, which accept the doctrine of competence-
                                 competence, only prima facie proof of the existence of an arbitration
                                 agreement must be adduced before the referral court. The referral
                                 court is not the appropriate forum to conduct a mini-trial by allowing
                                 the parties to adduce the evidence in regard to the existence or
                                 validity of an arbitration agreement. The determination of the
                                 existence and validity of an arbitration agreement on the basis of
                                 evidence ought to be left to the arbitral tribunal. This position of law
                                 can also be gauged from the plain language of the statute."



                          30.   In the recent case of SBI General Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Krish
                          Spinning, 2024 INSC 532, the Supreme Court has clarified that at the stage



Signature Not Verified


Digitally Signed          ARB.P. 703/2023                                                           Page 20 of 23


By:KAMLA RAWAT


Signing Date:13.10.2024


16:15:55

                           of appointing an arbitrator, the Court's role is limited to determining the
                          prima facie existence of an arbitration agreement, and "nothing else". It was
                          observed therein as follows:

                                "113. Referring to the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Arbitration
                                and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015, it was observed in In Re:

                                Interplay (supra) that the High Court and the Supreme Court at the stage
                                of appointment of arbitrator shall examine the existence of a prima facie
                                arbitration agreement and not any other issues. The relevant observations
                                are extracted hereinbelow:

                                    "209. The above extract indicates that the Supreme Court or
                                    High Court at the stage of the appointment of an arbitrator
                                    shall "examine the existence of a prima facie arbitration
                                    agreement and not other issues". These other issues not only
                                    pertain to the validity of the arbitration agreement, but also
                                    include any other issues which are a consequence of
                                    unnecessary judicial interference in the arbitration
                                    proceedings. Accordingly, the "other issues" also include
                                    examination and impounding of an unstamped instrument by the
                                    referral court at the 
Section 8
 or 
Section 11
 stage. The process
                                    of examination, impounding, and dealing with an unstamped
                                    instrument under the 
Stamp Act
 is not a timebound process, and
                                    therefore does not align with the stated goal of the 
Arbitration
                                    Act
 to ensure expeditious and time-bound appointment of
                                    arbitrators. [...]"

                                                                                  (Emphasis supplied)

 
114. In view of the observations made by this Court in In Re. Interplay, it
                                is clear that the scope of enquiry at the stage of appointment of arbitrator
                                is limited to the scrutiny of prima facie existence of the arbitration
                                agreement, and nothing else. For this reason, we find it difficult to hold
                                that the observations made in Vidya Drolia and adopted in 
NTPC v. SPML
                                Infra Ltd.
 that the jurisdiction of the referral court when dealing with the
                                issue of "accord and satisfaction" under 
Section 11
 extends to weeding
                                out ex-facie non-arbitrable and frivolous disputes would continue to apply
                                despite the subsequent decision in In Re. Interplay."


                                123. The power available to the referral courts has to be construed in the
                                light of the fact that no right to appeal is available against any order
                                passed by the referral court under 
Section 11
 for either appointing or
                                refusing to appoint an arbitrator. Thus, by delving into the domain of the
                                arbitral tribunal at the nascent stage of 
Section 11
, the referral courts also




Signature Not Verified


Digitally Signed          ARB.P. 703/2023                                                             Page 21 of 23


By:KAMLA RAWAT


Signing Date:13.10.2024


16:15:55

                                  run the risk of leaving the claimant in a situation wherein it does not have
                                 any forum to approach for the adjudication of its claims, if it 
Section 11

                                 application is rejected."



                          31.    Thus, it is not open for the respondent to resist arbitration based on
                          their assertion that some of the claim/s fall within the scope of "expected
                          matters". However, the respondent would be well within its right to move an
                          appropriate application under 
Section 16
 of the Arbitration and Conciliation
                          Act, 1996, raising appropriate objections in this regard.

                          32.    Consequently, in view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances and
                          the legal position as noted hereinabove, it is incumbent on this Court to
                          appoint an independent arbitral tribunal to adjudicate the disputes between
                          the parties.

                          33.    Accordingly, Mr. Justice (Retd.) Dinesh Maheshwari, Former Judge,
                          Supreme Court of India (Mobile No.:9485006617) is appointed as the Sole
                          Arbitrator to adjudicate the disputes between the parties.

                          34.    It is clarified that the respondent shall be entitled to raise appropriate
                          jurisdictional objections/move application under 
Section 16
 of the
                          Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, inter-alia, on the ground that the
                          claim/s sought to be raised fall within the scope of excepted matters.
                          Needless to say, in the event of any such application being filed, the same
                          shall be dealt with and adjudicated upon by the learned Sole Arbitrator in
                          accordance with law. It is made clear that this Court has not expressed any
                          opinion with regard thereto.

                          35.    The learned Sole Arbitrator may proceed with the arbitration
                          proceedings subject to furnishing to the parties requisite disclosures as
                          required under 
Section 12
 of the A&C Act.



Signature Not Verified


Digitally Signed          ARB.P. 703/2023                                                            Page 22 of 23


By:KAMLA RAWAT


Signing Date:13.10.2024


16:15:55


                           36.   The learned Sole Arbitrator shall be entitled to fee in accordance with
                          Fourth Schedule to the A&C Act; or as may otherwise be agreed to between
                          the parties and the learned Sole Arbitrator.

                          37.   The parties shall share the arbitrator's fee and arbitral costs, equally.

                          38.   All rights and contentions of the parties in relation to the
                          claims/counter-claims are kept open, to be decided by the learned Arbitrator
                          on their merits, in accordance with law.

                          39.   Needless to say, nothing in this order shall be construed as an
                          expression of opinion of this Court on the merits of the case.

                          40.   The present petition stands disposed of in the above terms.



                                                                                    SACHIN DATTA, J
                          OCTOBER 4, 2024/cl, sv





Signature Not Verified


Digitally Signed          ARB.P. 703/2023                                                    Page 23 of 23


By:KAMLA RAWAT


Signing Date:13.10.2024


16:15:55


 

