



[Cites 
30
, Cited by 
0
]




Andhra Pradesh High Court - Amravati


Chilikuri Mariyadas, Another, vs The State Of Ap Rep By Its Pp Hyd., on 16 June, 2025


            HIGH COURT OF ANDHRA PRADESH AT AMARAVATI

                                     ****

                CRIMINAL REVISION CASE No.44 OF 2011

Between:-


      1. Chilikuri Mariyadas, S/o Venakateswarlu, R/o Somavaram Village,
         Nandigama Mandal, Krishna District.
      2. Chilikuri Pitchayya, S/o Venkateswarlu, R/o Somavaram Village,
         Nandigama Mandal, Krishna District.
                                                           ...Petitioners
                                      AND



The State of A.P., rep by Public Prosecutor,
High Court of A.P., Hyderabad,.
                                                                ...Respondent



                                        ****

DATE OF ORDER PRONOUNCED                       :   16.06.2025
                                      2
                                                                    Dr.YLR, J
                                                       Crl.R.C.No.44 of 2011
                                                           Dated 16.06.2025

SUBMITTED FOR APPROVAL:



         THE HONOURABLE DR JUSTICE Y. LAKSHMANA RAO




1. Whether Reporters of Local Newspapers
   may be allowed to see the Judgment?        Yes/No


2. Whether the copy of Judgment may be
   marked to Law Reporters/Journals?          Yes/No


3. Whether His Lordship wish to see the
  fair copy of the Judgment?                  Yes/No




                                           _________________________
                                             Dr. Y. LAKSHMANA RAO, J
                                        3
                                                                          Dr.YLR, J
                                                             Crl.R.C.No.44 of 2011
                                                                 Dated 16.06.2025

        * THE HONOURABLE DR JUSTICE Y. LAKSHMANA RAO


               + CRIMINAL REVISION CASE No.44 OF 2011

% 16.06.2025
# Between:

      3. Chilikuri Mariyadas, S/o Venakateswarlu, R/o Somavaram Village,
         Nandigama Mandal, Krishna District.
      4. Chilikuri Pitchayya, S/o Venkateswarlu, R/o Somavaram Village,
         Nandigama Mandal, Krishna District.
                                                           ...Petitioners




                                     AND

The State of A.P., rep by Public Prosecutor,
High Court of A.P., Hyderabad,.
                                                            ...Respondent



! Counsel for the Petitioners     : Sri P.Prabhakara Rao


^Counsel for the Respondent : Ms. P.Akhila Naidu,
                              Assistant Public Prosecutor
< Gist:

> Head Note:
                                 4
                                                 Dr.YLR, J
                                    Crl.R.C.No.44 of 2011
                                        Dated 16.06.2025


? Cases referred:

  1) (2002) 6 SCC 650
  2) (2010) 12 SCC 190
  3) (2010) 1 SCC 707
  4) (2011) 3 SCC 626
  5) (2019) 17 SCC 301
  6) 1995 Supp (3) SCC 438
  7) 1995 Supp (3) SCC 438
  8) (2009) 16 SCC 605
  9) (2020) 15 SCC 359
  10) 2025 SCC OnLine SC 107
  11) (2010) 8 SCC 628
  12) (2001) 9 SCC 618
  13) 2025 INSC 168
  14) 2024 SCC OnLine SC 4091
  15) (2019) 3 SCC 315
  16) (2005) 2 SCC 659
  17) (2021) 19 SCC 144
  18) SCC OnLine SC 1387
                                        5
                                                                               Dr.YLR, J
                                                                  Crl.R.C.No.44 of 2011
                                                                      Dated 16.06.2025

         THE HONOURABLE DR JUSTICE Y. LAKSHMANA RAO

                CRIMINAL REVISION CASE NO: 44 of 2011

ORDER:


      The Criminal Revision Case has been preferred under 
Sections 397
 and


401
 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for brevity 'the 
Cr.P.C
') challenging

the judgment dated 21.12.2010 in Crl.A.No.29 of 2009 passed by the learned

VI Additional District and Sessions Judge (F.T.C) Krishna, Machilipatnam,

confirming the judgment dated 09.03.2009 in S.C.No.300 of 2008 passed by

the learned Assistant Sessions Judge, Nandigama finding the revisionists

guilty of the offence punishable under 
Section 306
 of the Indian Penal Code,

1860 (for short 'the 
I.P.C
') and convicted the revisionists under 
Section 235 (2)


of 'the 
Cr.P.C
.,' and sentenced them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a

period of four years and to pay a fine of Rs.500/- (Rupees Five Hundred Only)

each and, in default, to undergo simple imprisonment for a period of three

months each.



2.    I have heard the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioners

and the learned Assistant Public Prosecutor.



3.    Sri P. Prabhakara Rao, the learned counsel for the petitioners, while

reiterating the grounds of the revision, submitted that the judgments of the

learned Courts below are contrary to law, weight of evidence and probabilities

of the case; the learned Courts below erred in convicting the petitioners merely

based on Ex.P8 dying declaration without any support from independent

                                         6

                                                                                 Dr.YLR, J

                                                                    Crl.R.C.No.44 of 2011

                                                                        Dated 16.06.2025

sources; the learned Courts below ought to have seen that there is no

investigation or either direct or indirect participation of the petitioners for the

alleged abetting of the offence of suicide within the contemplation of 
Section

306
 of 'the 
I.P.C
'; the Courts below ought to have seen that non-examination

of the doctor who attended the deceased was fatal to the prosecution case

inasmuch as there was no evidence to show about the mental condition of the

deceased enabling her to make a statement as to the offence; the learned

Courts below ought to have seen that as the post-mortem discloses that the

deceased sustained 100% burn injuries that it is impossible or highly

improbable to make a statement under Ex.A8; the learned Courts below ought

to have seen that P.Ws.1 to 4, who are direct eye witnesses, did not support

the case of the prosecution and this itself creates any amount of doubt on the

case of the prosecution; the learned Courts below ought to have seen that

there are material contradictions between the evidence of P.W.6 and P.W.9 as

to the recording of the statement of the deceased by the P.W.9; and that

eventually, requested to allow the criminal revision case by setting aside the

impugned judgments passed by the learned Appellate and Trial Courts.


4.    Per contra, Ms. P. Akila Naidu, learned Assistant Public Prosecutor

vehemently argued that the learned Appellate Court having gone through the

evidence of the prosecution witnesses and the judgment of the learned Trial

Court rightly passed the judgment confirming the conviction for the offence

                                             7

                                                                                        Dr.YLR, J

                                                                           Crl.R.C.No.44 of 2011

                                                                               Dated 16.06.2025

charged and urged to dismiss the revision case as there are no material

irregularities, miscarriage of justice and misreading of the evidence.



5.     Thoughtful consideration is bestowed on the arguments advanced by

the learned counsel for the petitioners and the learned Assistant Public

Prosecutor. I have perused the record.





6.     Now the point for consideration is:



       "Whether the judgment in Crl.A.No.29 of 2009 dated 21.12.2010
       passed by the learned VI Additional District and Sessions Judge
       (F.T.C) Krishna, Machilipatnam, is correct, legal, and proper with
       respect to its finding, sentence, or judgment, and there are any
       material irregularities? And to what relief?"



7.     It is apposite to refer to the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in


Bindeshwari Prasad Singh v State of Bihar1
 wherein at Paragraph Nos.12

& 13 it is held as under:




       "13.... In the absence of any legal infirmity either in the procedure or in
       the conduct of the trial, there was no justification for the High Court to
       interfere in the exercise of its revisional jurisdiction. It has repeatedly
       been held that the High Court should not re-appreciate the evidence to
       reach a finding different from the trial Court. In the absence of manifest
       illegality resulting in grave miscarriage of justice, exercise of revisional
       jurisdiction in such cases is not warranted."



8.     This Court, while exercising its jurisdiction under 
Section 397
 read with


Section 401
 of 'the 
Cr.P.C
.,' cannot invoke it's revisional power as a Second

Appellate Court and re-appreciation of evidence is not possible in the revision

case as 
laid down in
 the decision in Bindeshwari Prasad Singh. However,

this Court is not denuded of its powers to examine whether judgments


1

(2002) 6 SCC 650

                                         8

                                                                                Dr.YLR, J

                                                                   Crl.R.C.No.44 of 2011

                                                                       Dated 16.06.2025

impugned are correct, legal and proper with respect to their findings, sentence

or even judgment and there are any material irregularities. If there are

manifest illegalities and interest of public justice requires interference for the

correction of those manifest illegalities or to prevent a great miscarriage of

justice, this Court is empowered to evaluate the evidence and analyze it and

come to a just conclusion


9.    It is the case of the prosecution emanating from the charge sheet that

the deceased-Chilukuri Mariyamma is the wife of Petitioner No.1. Petitioner

No.2 is the younger brother of Petitioner No.1. Marriage of Petitioner No.1 was

performed with deceased about two decades ago. They were blessed with two

daughters and one son. From the very beginning of the marriage, Petitioner

No.1 had been harassing the deceased both physically and mentally

suspecting her fidelity. Frequent quarrels ensued between them. On the night

of 14.02.2008, the Petitioners beat deceased due to suspicion of her fidelity.

As a result, she felt insulted, as she was beaten by Petitioner No.2 with a

chappal, she poured kerosene on her body and set herself ablaze. The whole

body was burnt. On 15.02.2008 at about 09.00 a.m., Petitioner No.1 shifted

the body of the deceased to Government Hospital, Nandigama and from

where to Government General Hospital, Vijayawada, wherein she succumbed

to injuries on the same day at about 02.30 p.m.


10.   Based on Ex.P11 Hospital intimation on 15.02.2008 at about 10.30

a.m., P.W.9 Sub-Inspector of Police, Nandigama Police Station had come

                                        9

                                                                             Dr.YLR, J

                                                                Crl.R.C.No.44 of 2011

                                                                    Dated 16.06.2025

posthaste to the Government Hospital, Nandigama, recorded the statement of

the deceased vide Ex.P12, basing on which a case in Cr.No.47 of 2008 under

the caption 'Woman Burns' was registered and took up investigation. P.W.9

visited the scene of offence, examined it in the presence of P.W.5 and L.W.15

Pallepogu China Anandam and seized M.O.1 - ten liters tin of kerosene under

Ex.P5 observation report. P.W.9 also drew Ex.P14 - sketch of scene of

offence. On receipt of death intimation of Chilukuri Mariyamma from

Government General Hospital, Vijayawada, P.W.8 altered the section of law

from the caption 'Woman Burns' to 
Section 306
 read with 34 of 'the 
I.P.C
.,' on

16.02.2008 at about 09.30 a.m. An inquest was conducted over the cadaver of

deceased in the presence of P.W.5 and L.W.15 under Ex.P6 - Inquest Report

and forwarded the body of Chilukuri Mariyamma to autopsy.


11.   P.W.6 - the Judicial Magistrate of I Class, Nandigama, on requisition

under Ex.P7 hospital intimation, had visited Government Hospital, Nandigama

and recorded Ex.P8 dying declaration of Chilukuri Mariyamma. P.W.7

conducted autopsy over the cadaver of deceased and issued Ex.P9 -

Postmortem certificate, certifying that the cause of death of Chilukuri

Mariyamma was due to burns and its complications. P.W.9 arrested Petitioner

No.1 on 19.02.2008 and Petitioner No.2 on 22.08.2008 and forwarded them to

the learned jurisdictional magistrate for judicial remand. On completion of

investigation, a charge sheet was filed.

                                       10


                                                                             Dr.YLR, J

                                                                Crl.R.C.No.44 of 2011

                                                                    Dated 16.06.2025


12.   The learned Judicial Magistrate of I Class, Nandigama took cognizance

of the offence under 
Section 306
 read with 34 of 'the 
I.P.C
.,' against the

Petitioners and registered the case as P.R.C.No.25 of 2008. In this case it is

expedient to examine whether there was any instigation either direct or

indirect on the part of the Petitioners driving Chilukuri Mariyamma for taking

extreme step of committing suicide by pouring kerosene on her body and set

herself ablaze. The doctor, who attended the deceased, was not examined by

the prosecution to speak about the mental condition of the deceased while

giving her dying declaration. The deceased received 100% burn injuries as

seen from the evidence of P.W.7, the doctor who conducted autopsy. P.Ws.1

to 4 deposed ignorance about the case of the prosecution. The Trial Court

based on the evidence of panch witnesses, the Judicial Magistrate of I Class,

Nandigama, inquest report and the dying declaration of the deceased,

convicted and sentenced the Petitioners.



13.   P.W.6 the Judicial I Class Magistrate, Nandigama who recorded the

dying declaration of the deceased deposed that he had commenced recording

of dying declaration at 10.45 a.m., and concluded at 10.55 a.m. He admitted

that there were no other persons present at the time of recording of dying

declaration expect the duty doctor and his attender. Whereas the evidence of

P.W.9 - the Sub-Inspector of Police is that he recorded the statement of the

deceased at about 10.50 a.m., and 11.00 a.m., on the same day of recording

of dying declaration by the learned Magistrate. The learned Magistrate

                                             11

                                                                                       Dr.YLR, J

                                                                          Crl.R.C.No.44 of 2011

                                                                              Dated 16.06.2025

recorded dying declaration of Chilukuri Mariyamma in her own words

(translated into English) as under:



              "My husband and his brother (my brother-in-law) Pitchayya
        beat me yesternight. They stated that why should I lead this life
        and why should not I die. Hence I poured kerosene and set
        myself fire. My mother-in-law brought me to the hospital."

14.    In this context, it is apposite to refer the landmark decisions of the

Hon'ble Apex Court about the principles and ratios to decide whether there

are adequate ingredients to determine about commission of abetment of

suicide by the petitioners.



15.    
In 
S.S. Chheena v. Vijay Kumar Mahajan2
, at Paragraph No.25 it is

held as under:






         25. "Abetment involves a mental process of instigating a person or
         intentionally aiding a person in doing of a thing. Without a positive
         act on the part of the accused to instigate or aid in committing
         suicide, conviction cannot be sustained. The intention of the
         legislature and the ratio of the cases decided by this Court is clear
         that in order to convict a person under 
Section 306
 IPC there has
         to be a clear mens rea to commit the offence. It also requires an
         active act or direct act which led the deceased to commit suicide
         seeing no option and that act must have been intended to push
         the deceased into such a position that he committed suicide."



16.    
In 
Amalendu Pal v. State of West Bengal3
, at Paragraph No.12 it is

held as under:




         12. "Thus, this Court has consistently taken the view that before
         holding an accused guilty of an offence under 
Section 306
 IPC,
         the court must scrupulously examine the facts and circumstances
         of the case and also assess the evidence adduced before it in
         order to find out whether the cruelty and harassment meted out to
         the victim had left the victim with no other alternative but to put an
         end to her life. It is also to be borne in mind that in cases of


2

(2010) 12 SCC 190

3

(2010) 1 SCC 707

                                              12

                                                                                          Dr.YLR, J

                                                                             Crl.R.C.No.44 of 2011

                                                                                 Dated 16.06.2025

         alleged abetment of suicide there must be proof of direct or
         indirect acts of incitement to the commission of suicide. Merely on
         the allegation of harassment without there being any positive
         action proximate to the time of occurrence on the part of the
         accused which led or compelled the person to commit suicide,
         conviction in terms of 
Section 306
 IPC is not sustainable."



17.    
In 
M. Mohan v. State4
, at Paragraph Nos.44 and 45 it is held as under:


              "44. Abetment involves a mental process of instigating a
         person or intentionally aiding a person in doing of a thing. Without
         a positive act on the part of the accused to instigate or aid in
         committing suicide, conviction cannot be sustained.

              45. The intention of the legislature and the ratio of the cases
         decided by this Court are clear that in order to convict a person
         under 
Section 306
 IPC there has to be a clear mens rea to commit
         the offence. It also requires an active act or direct act which led
         the deceased to commit suicide seeing no option and this act must
         have been intended to push the deceased into such a position that
         he/she committed suicide."



18.    
In 
Ude Singh v. State of Haryana5
, at Paragraph Nos.15 and 16 it is

held as under:




                 "15. Thus, "abetment" involves a mental process of instigating
         a person in doing something. A person abets the doing of a thing
         when:

         (i) he instigates any person to do that thing; or

         (ii) he engages with one or more persons in any conspiracy for the
         doing of that thing; or

         (iii) he intentionally aids, by acts or illegal omission, the doing of that
         thing.

         These are essential to complete the abetment as a crime. The word
         "instigate" literally means to provoke, incite, urge on or bring about
         by persuasion to do anything.

                 16. In cases of alleged abetment of suicide, there must be a
         proof of direct or indirect act(s) of incitement to the commission of
         suicide. It could hardly be disputed that the question of cause of a
         suicide, particularly in the context of an offence of abetment of
         suicide, remains a vexed one, involving multifaceted and complex


4

(2011) 3 SCC 626

5

(2019) 17 SCC 301

                                   13

                                                                            Dr.YLR, J

                                                               Crl.R.C.No.44 of 2011

                                                                   Dated 16.06.2025

attributes of human behaviour and responses/reactions. In the case
of accusation for abetment of suicide, the court would be looking for
cogent and convincing proof of the act(s) of incitement to the
commission of suicide. In the case of suicide, mere allegation of
harassment of the deceased by another person would not suffice
unless there be such action on the part of the accused which
compels the person to commit suicide; and such an offending action
ought to be proximate to the time of occurrence. Whether a person
has abetted in the commission of suicide by another or not, could
only be gathered from the facts and circumstances of each case.

      16.1. For the purpose of finding out if a person has abetted
commission of suicide by another, the consideration would be if the
accused is guilty of the act of instigation of the act of suicide. As
explained and reiterated by this Court in the decisions above
referred, instigation means to goad, urge forward, provoke, incite or
encourage to do an act. If the persons who committed suicide had
been hypersensitive and the action of the accused is otherwise not
ordinarily expected to induce a similarly circumstanced person to
commit suicide, it may not be safe to hold the accused guilty of
abetment of suicide. But, on the other hand, if the accused by his
acts and by his continuous course of conduct creates a situation
which leads the deceased perceiving no other option except to
commit suicide, the case may fall within the four corners of 
Section
306
 IPC. If the accused plays an active role in tarnishing the self-
esteem and self-respect of the victim, which eventually draws the
victim to commit suicide, the accused may be held guilty of
abetment of suicide. The question of mens rea on the part of the
accused in such cases would be examined with reference to the
actual acts and deeds of the accused and if the acts and deeds are
only of such nature where the accused intended nothing more than
harassment or snap show of anger, a particular case may fall short
of the offence of abetment of suicide. However, if the accused kept
on irritating or annoying the deceased by words or deeds until the
deceased reacted or was provoked, a particular case may be that of
abetment of suicide. Such being the matter of delicate analysis of
human behaviour, each case is required to be examined on its own
facts, while taking note of all the surrounding factors having bearing
on the actions and psyche of the accused and the deceased.

      16.2. We may also observe that human mind could be
affected and could react in myriad ways; and impact of one's action
on the mind of another carries several imponderables. Similar
actions are dealt with differently by different persons; and so far a
particular person's reaction to any other human's action is
concerned, there is no specific theorem or yardstick to estimate or
assess the same. Even in regard to the factors related with the
question of harassment of a girl, many factors are to be considered
like age, personality, upbringing, rural or urban set-ups, education,

                                              14

                                                                                         Dr.YLR, J

                                                                            Crl.R.C.No.44 of 2011

                                                                                Dated 16.06.2025

         etc. Even the response to the ill action of eve teasing and its impact
         on a young girl could also vary for a variety of factors, including
         those of background, self-confidence and upbringing. Hence, each
         case is required to be dealt with on its own facts and
         circumstances."



19.    In Swamy Prahaladdas v. State of Madhya Pradesh6, at Paragraph

Nos.2 and 3 it is held as under:



                "2. The impugned order of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh
         is in confirmation of the order of the Court of Session, whereby, the
         appellant herein, has been summoned to face trial for offence under
         
Section 306
 IPC. The said order has been passed in this
         background:

         Sushila Bai, respondent, a married woman, is alleged to have had
         two paramours, one was the deceased and the other is the
         appellant. It is alleged that there was sexual jealousy between the
         two. The deceased was a married man. The prosecution alleges
         that Sushila Bai had completely bewitched him but her heart was
         with the appellant. On the morning of 13-6-1992, all the three had a
         quarrel while sharing their morning tea. During that course, the
         appellant is said to have remarked for the deceased to go and die.
         The prosecution alleges that thereafter the deceased went home in
         a dejected mood, whereafter he committed suicide. The suicide has
         been termed as the direct cause for the treatment meted out to the
         deceased by the appellant. It is Sushila Devi though, who alone
         stands committed to the Court of Session to face trial because of
         her preferential treatment to the appellant.

         3. At the time of framing of charge, the trial court thought it
         appropriate to associate the appellant herein as an accused
         because of the words he uttered to the deceased. We think that just
         on the basis of that utterance the Court of Session was in error in
         summoning the appellant to face trial. In the first place it is difficult,
         in the facts and circumstances, to come to even a prima facie view
         that what was uttered by the appellant was enough to instigate the
         deceased to commit suicide. Those words are casual in nature
         which are often employed in the heat of the moment between
         quarrelling people. Nothing serious is expected to follow thereafter.

         The said act does not reflect the requisite mens rea on the
         assumption that these words would be carried out in all events.
         Besides the deceased had plenty of time to weigh the pros and
         cons of the act by which he ultimately ended his life. It cannot be
         said that the suicide by the deceased was the direct result of the
         words uttered by the appellant. For these reasons, the error is


6

1995 Supp (3) SCC 438

                                           15

                                                                                     Dr.YLR, J

                                                                        Crl.R.C.No.44 of 2011

                                                                            Dated 16.06.2025

         apparent requiring rectification. The appeal is accordingly allowed.
         The orders of the High Court and that of the Court of Session are
         thus upset. The appellant need not face the charge."


20.    
In 
Gurcharan Singh v. State of Punjab7
, at Paragraph No.15 it is held

as under:




               "15. As in all crimes, mens rea has to be established. To
         prove the offence of abetment, as specified under 
Section 107
 IPC,
         the state of mind to commit a particular crime must be visible, to
         determine the culpability. In order to prove mens rea, there has to
         be something on record to establish or show that the appellant
         herein had a guilty mind and in furtherance of that state of mind,
         abetted the suicide of the deceased. The ingredient of mens rea
         cannot be assumed to be ostensibly present but has to be visible
         and conspicuous. However, what transpires in the present matter is
         that both the trial court as well as the High Court never examined
         whether the appellant had the mens rea for the crime he is held to
         have committed. The conviction of the appellant by the trial court as
         well as the High Court on the theory that the woman with two young
         kids might have committed suicide possibly because of the
         harassment faced by her in the matrimonial house is not at all borne
         out by the evidence in the case. Testimonies of the PWs do not
         show that the wife was unhappy because of the appellant and she
         was forced to take such a step on his account."



21.    In Chitresh Kumar Chopra v. State (NCT of Delhi) 8, at Paragraph

No.13 it is held as under:



               "13. As per the section, a person can be said to have
         abetted in doing a thing, if he, firstly, instigates any person to
         do that thing; or secondly, engages with one or more other
         person or persons in any conspiracy for the doing of that thing,
         if an act or illegal omission takes place in pursuance of that
         conspiracy, and in order to the doing of that thing; or thirdly,
         intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, the doing of
         that thing. Explanation to 
Section 107
 states that any wilful
         misrepresentation or willful concealment of material fact which
         he is bound to disclose, may also come within the contours of
         "abetment". It is manifest that under all the three situations,
         direct involvement of the person or persons concerned in the


7

1995 Supp (3) SCC 438

8

(2009) 16 SCC 605

                                             16

                                                                                       Dr.YLR, J

                                                                          Crl.R.C.No.44 of 2011

                                                                              Dated 16.06.2025

          commission of offence of suicide is essential to bring home the
          offence under 
Section 306
 IPC."



22.      
In 
Rajesh v. State of Haryana9
, at Paragraph No.13 it is held as under:


                "9. Conviction under 
Section 306
 IPC is not sustainable on the
          allegation of harassment without there being any positive action
          proximate to the time of occurrence on the part of the accused,
          which led or compelled the person to commit suicide. In order to
          bring a case within the purview of 
Section 306
 IPC, there must be a
          case of suicide and in the commission of the said offence, the
          person who is said to have abetted the commission of suicide must
          have played an active role by an act of instigation or by doing
          certain act to facilitate the commission of suicide. Therefore, the act
          of abetment by the person charged with the said offence must be
          proved and established by the prosecution before he could be
          convicted under 
Section 306
 IPC."



23.      Further, the learned counsel for the petitioners relied upon the judgment

of the Hon'ble Apex Court in 
Mahendra Awase v. State of Madhya

Pradesh10
 wherein at Paragraph Nos.18, 19 and 20 it is held as under:


         "18...As has been held hereinabove, to satisfy the requirement
         of instigation the accused by his act or omission or by a
         continued course of conduct should have created such
         circumstances that the deceased was left with no other option
         except to commit suicide. It was also held that a word uttered
         in a fit of anger and emotion without intending the
         consequences to actually follow cannot be said to be
         instigation.



         19. Applying the above principle to the facts of the present
         case, we are convinced that there are no grounds to frame
         charges under 
Section 306
 IPC against the appellant. This is
         so even if we take the prosecution's case on a demurrer and
         at its highest, a reading of the suicide note reveals that the
         appellant was asking the deceased to repay the loan
         guaranteed by the deceased and advanced to Ritesh Malakar.



9    (2020) 15 SCC 359
10   2025 SCC OnLine SC 107

                                  17

                                                                         Dr.YLR, J

                                                            Crl.R.C.No.44 of 2011

                                                                Dated 16.06.2025

It could not be said that the appellant by performing his duty of
realising outstanding loans at the behest of his employer can
be said to have instigated the deceased to commit suicide.
Equally so, with the transcripts, including the portions
emphasised hereinabove. Even taken literally, it could not be
said that the appellant intended to instigate the commission of
suicide. It could certainly not be said that the appellant by his
acts created circumstances which left the deceased with no
other option except to commit suicide. Viewed from the
armchair of the appellant, the exchanges with the deceased,
albeit heated, are not with intent to leave the deceased with no
other option but to commit suicide. This is the conclusion we
draw taking a realistic approach, keeping the context and the
situation in mind. Strangely, the FIR has also been lodged
after a delay of two months and twenty days.

20. This Court has, over the last several decades, repeatedly
reiterated the higher threshold, mandated by law for 
Section
306
 IPC [Now 
Section 108
 read with 
Section 45
 of the
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023] to be attracted. They however
seem to have followed more in the breach. 
Section 306
 IPC
appears to be casually and too readily resorted to by the
police. While the persons involved in genuine cases where the
threshold is met should not be spared, the provision should
not be deployed against individuals, only to assuage the
immediate feelings of the distraught family of the deceased.
The conduct of the proposed accused and the deceased, their
interactions and conversations preceding the unfortunate
death of the deceased should be approached from a practical
point of view and not divorced from day-to-day realities of life.
Hyperboles employed in exchanges should not, without
anything more, be glorified as an instigation to commit suicide.
It is time the investigating agencies are sensitised to the law

laid down by
 this Court under 
Section 306
 so that persons are
not subjected to the abuse of process of a totally untenable
prosecution. The trial courts also should exercise great caution
and circumspection and should not adopt a play it safe
syndrome by mechanically framing charges, even if the
investigating agencies in a given case have shown utter
disregard for the ingredients of 
Section 306
 of 'the 
I.P.C
'.


                                          18


                                                                                Dr.YLR, J

                                                                   Crl.R.C.No.44 of 2011

                                                                       Dated 16.06.2025


24.    
In 
Madan Mohan Singh v. State of Gujarat11
, it is held that in order to

bring out an offence under 
Section 306
 of 'the 
I.P.C
.,' specific abetment as

contemplated by 
Section 107
 of 'the 
I.P.C
.,' on the part of the accused with an

intention to bring about the suicide of the person concerned as a result of that

abetment is required. It was further held that the intention of the accused to

aid or to instigate or to abet the deceased to commit suicide is a must for

attracting 
Section 306
 of 'the 
I.P.C
'.




25.    
In 
Ramesh Kumar v. State of Chhattisgarh12
 the Hon'ble Apex Court

while examining different shades of the meaning of "instigation" at Paragraph

No.20 reads as under:




              "20... Instigation is to goad, urge forward, provoke, incite or
      encourage to do 'an act'. To satisfy the requirement of instigation
      though it is not necessary that actual words must be used to that
      effect or what constitutes instigation must necessarily and
      specifically be suggestive of the consequence. Yet a reasonable
      certainty to incite the consequence must be capable of being spelt
      out. The present one is not a case where the accused had by his
      acts or omission or by a continued course of conduct created such
      circumstances that the deceased was left with no other option except
      to commit suicide in which case instigation may have been inferred.
      A word uttered in the fit of anger or emotion without intending the
      consequences to actually follow cannot be said to be instigation."



26.    
In 
Ayyub v. State of Uttar Pradesh
 13 the Hon'ble Apex Court at

Paragraph Nos.19 and 21 held as under:




 
"19...By a long line of judgments, this Court has
       reiterated that in order to make out an offence under 
Section
       306
 IPC, specific abetment as contemplated by 
Section 107


11

   (2010)
 
8
 SCC 628

12

   (2001) 9 SCC 618

13

   2025 INSC 168

                                            19

                                                                                    Dr.YLR, J

                                                                       Crl.R.C.No.44 of 2011

                                                                           Dated 16.06.2025

          
IPC
 on the part of the accused with an intention to bring about
          the suicide of the person concerned as a result of that
          abetment is required. It has been further held that the intention
          of the accused to aid or instigate or to abet the deceased to
          commit suicide is a must for attracting 
Section 306
 IPC [See
          
Madan Mohan Singh vs. State of Gujarat and Another
, (2010)
          8 SCC 628].
 
Further, the alleged harassment meted out
          should have left the victim with no other alternative but to put
          an end to her life and that in cases of abetment of suicide
          there must be proof of direct or indirect acts of incitement to
          commit suicide [See Amalendu Pal alias 
Jhantu vs. State of
          West Bengal
, (2010) 1 SCC 707 and M. Mohan vs. State,
          (2011) 3 SCC 626 and Ramesh Kumar vs. State of
          Chhattisgarh, (2001) 9 SCC 618].


          21. We find none of the ingredients required in law to make
          out a case under 
Section 306
 IPC to be even remotely
          mentioned in the charge-sheet or are being borne out from the
          material on record. The utterance attributed to the appellants
          assuming it to be true cannot be said to be of such a nature as
          to leave the deceased Tanu with no other alternative but to put
          an end to her life. The surrounding circumstances, particularly
          the prior lodgment of the FIR by the first appellant against the
          family of Tanu for the death of his son Ziaul Rahman, does
          indicate an element of desperation on the part of the
          respondent no. 2 to somehow implicate the appellants.
          Reliance of the statements recorded under 
Section 161

          Cr.P.C. belatedly on 07.11.2022, 08.11.2022 and 22.11.2022,
          only reinforces out suspicion viz. one-sided, partial and
          inimical investigation. Under these circumstances, proceeding
          with the trial against the appellants in the charge-sheet as filed
          will be a gross abuse of process."



27.       
In 
Nipun Aneja v. State of Uttar Pradesh14
 the Hon'ble Apex Court at

Paragraph Nos.19, 21, 22, 23, and 24 held as under:


 
"19...This Court in 
Ude Singh v. State of Haryana
, (2019) 17 SCC
         301, held that in order to convict an accused under 
Section 306
 of
         the IPC, the state of mind to commit a particular crime must be
         visible with regard to determining the culpability. It was observed as
         under:-




14


     2024 SCC OnLine SC 4091

                               20

                                                                        Dr.YLR, J

                                                           Crl.R.C.No.44 of 2011

                                                               Dated 16.06.2025

"16. In cases of alleged abetment of suicide, there must be
a proof of direct or indirect act(s) of incitement to the
commission of suicide. It could hardly be disputed that the
question of cause of a suicide, particularly in the context of
an offence of abetment of suicide, remains a vexed one,
involving multifaceted and complex attributes of human
behaviour and responses/reactions. In the case of
accusation for abetment of suicide, the Court would be
looking for cogent and convincing proof of the act(s) of
incitement to the commission of suicide. In the case of
suicide, mere allegation of harassment of the deceased by
another person would not suffice unless there be such
action on the part of the accused which compels the
person to commit suicide; and such an offending action
ought to be proximate to the time of occurrence. Whether a
person has abetted in the commission of suicide by
another or not, could only be gathered from the facts and
circumstances of each case.

16.1. For the purpose of finding out if a person has abetted
commission of suicide by another; the consideration would
be if the accused is guilty of the act of instigation of the act
of suicide. As explained and reiterated by this Court in the
decisions above referred, instigation means to goad, urge
forward, provoke, incite or encourage to do an act. If the
persons who committed suicide had been hypersensitive
and the action of accused is otherwise not ordinarily
expected to induce a similarly circumstanced person to
commit suicide, it may not be safe to hold the accused
guilty of abetment of suicide. But, on the other hand, if the
accused by his acts and by his continuous course of
conduct creates a situation which leads the deceased
perceiving no other option except to commit suicide, the
case may fall within the four-corners of 
Section 306
 IPC. If
the accused plays an active role in tarnishing the self-

esteem and self-respect of the victim, which eventually
draws the victim to commit suicide, the accused may be
held guilty of abetment of suicide. The question of mens
rea on the part of the accused in such cases would be
examined with reference to the actual acts and deeds of
the accused and if the acts and deeds are only of such
nature where the accused intended nothing more than
harassment or snap show of anger, a particular case may
fall short of the offence of abetment of suicide. However, if
the accused kept on irritating or annoying the deceased by

                                  21

                                                                         Dr.YLR, J

                                                            Crl.R.C.No.44 of 2011

                                                                Dated 16.06.2025

      words or deeds until the deceased reacted or was
      provoked, a particular case may be that of abetment of
      suicide. Such being the matter of delicate analysis of
      human behaviour, each case is required to be examined
      on its own facts, while taking note of all the surrounding
      factors having bearing on the actions and psyche of the
      accused and the deceased."

21. The ingredients to constitute an offence under 
Section 306
 of
the IPC (abetment of suicide) would stand fulfilled if the suicide is
committed by the deceased due to direct and alarming
encouragement/incitement by the accused leaving no option but to
commit suicide. Further, as the extreme action of committing
suicide is also on account of great disturbance to the psychological
imbalance of the deceased such incitement can be divided into two
broad categories. First, where the deceased is having sentimental
ties or physical relations with the accused and the second category
would be where the deceased is having relations with the accused
in his or her official capacity. In the case of former category
sometimes a normal quarrel or the hot exchange of words may
result into immediate psychological imbalance, consequently
creating a situation of depression, loss of charm in life and if the
person is unable to control sentiments of expectations, it may give
temptations to the person to commit suicide, e.g., when there is
relation of husband and wife, mother and son, brother and sister,
sister and sister and other relations of such type, where sentimental
tie is by blood or due to physical relations. In the case of second
category the tie is on account of official relations, where the
expectations would be to discharge the obligations as provided for
such duty in law and to receive the considerations as provided in
law. In normal circumstances, relationships by sentimental tie
cannot be equated with the official relationship. The reason being
different nature of conduct to maintain that relationship. The former
category leaves more expectations, whereas in the latter category,
by and large, the expectations and obligations are prescribed by
law, rules, policies and regulations.

22. The test that the Court should adopt in this type of cases is to
make an endeavour to ascertain on the basis of the materials on
record whether there is anything to indicate even prima facie that
the accused intended the consequences of the act, l.e., suicide.
Over a period of time, the trend of the courts is that such intention
can be read into or gathered only after a full-fledged trial. The
problem is that the courts just look into the factum of suicide and
nothing more. We believe that such understanding on the part of
the courts is wrong. It all depends on the nature of the offence &

                                   22

                                                                          Dr.YLR, J

                                                             Crl.R.C.No.44 of 2011

                                                                 Dated 16.06.2025

accusation. For example, whether the accused had the common
intention under 
Section 34
 of the IPC could be gathered only after a
full-fledged trial on the basis of the depositions of the witnesses as
regards the genesis of the occurrence, the manner of assault, the
weapon used, the role played by the accused etc. However, in
cases of abetment of suicide by and large the facts make things
clear more particularly from the nature of the allegations itself. The
Courts should know how to apply the correct principles of law
governing abetment of suicide to the facts on record. It is the
inability on the part of the courts to understand and apply the
correct principles of law to the cases of abetment of suicide, which
leads to unnecessary prosecutions. We do understand and
appreciate the feelings and sentiments of the family members of
the deceased and we cannot find any fault on their part if they
decide to lodge a First Information Report with the police. However,
it is ultimately for the police and the courts of law to look into the
matter and see that the persons against whom allegations have
been levelled are not unnecessarily harassed or they are not put to
trial just for the sake of prosecuting them.

23. (a) On the date of the meeting, l.e., 03.11.2006, did the
appellants create a situation of unbearable harassment or torture,
leading the deceased to see suicide as the only escape? To
ascertain this, the two statements of the colleagues of the
deceased referred to by us were sufficient.

(b) Are the appellants accused of exploiting the emotional
vulnerability of the deceased by making him feel worthless or
underserving of life leading him to commit suicide?

(c) Is it a case of threatening the deceased with dire consequences,
such as harm to his family or severe financial ruin to the extent that
he believed suicide was the only way out?

(d) Is it a case of making false allegations that may have damaged
the reputation of the deceased & push him to commit suicide due to
public humiliation & loss of dignity.

24. The aforesaid are just illustrations that could be considered as
abetment under the law in the facts & circumstances of a given
case."

                                           23


                                                                                 Dr.YLR, J

                                                                    Crl.R.C.No.44 of 2011

                                                                        Dated 16.06.2025


28.       
In 
Arjunan v. State
 15 the Hon'ble Apex Court, while explaining the

necessary ingredients of 
Section 306
 of 'the 
I.P.C
.,' in detail, at Paragraph

No.7 it is held as under:




                 "7... The essential ingredients of the offence under
          
Section 306
 I.P.C. are: (i) the abetment; (ii) the intention of the
          accused to aid or instigate or abet the deceased to commit
          suicide. The act of the accused, however, insulting the
          deceased by using abusive language will not, by itself,
          constitute the abetment of suicide. There should be evidence
          capable of suggesting that the accused intended by such act
          to instigate the deceased to commit suicide. Unless the
          ingredients of instigation/abetment to commit suicide are
          satisfied, accused cannot be convicted under 
Section 306

          IPC."

29.       
In 
Netai Dutta v. State of West Bengal16
 the Hon'ble Apex Court at

Paragraph Nos.5, 6, and 7 held as under:




          "Where an employee of a company was transferred from one
          place to another. However, he failed to join. Thereafter, he
          sent a letter of resignation expressing his grievance against
          stagnancy to salary and unpleasant situation. The company
          accepted the resignation. Thereafter, the said employee
          committed suicide. He left behind a suicide note, alleging
          therein that Netai Dutta and, one Paramesh Chatterjee
          engaged him in several wrong doings. The same was alleged
          as, torture. The brother of the deceased filed complaint,
          against Netai Dutta and others under 
Section 306
 of the IPC.
          A learned Single Judge of the High Court of Calcutta declined
          to quash the complaint. In appeal, however, this Court while
          quashing the complaint, at paragraphs 5 and 6 observed as
          under:

          "5. There is absolutely no averment in the alleged suicide note
          that the present appellant had caused any harm to him or was
          in any way responsible for delay in paying salary to deceased
          Pranab Kumar Nag. It seems that the deceased was very
          much dissatisfied with the working conditions at the work
          place. But, it may also be noticed that the deceased after his


15

     (2019) 3 SCC 315

16

     (2005) 2 SCC 659

                                            24

                                                                                    Dr.YLR, J

                                                                       Crl.R.C.No.44 of 2011

                                                                           Dated 16.06.2025

          transfer in 1999 had never joined the office at 160 B.L. Saha
          Road, Kolkata and had absented himself for a period of two
          years and that the suicide took place on 16-2-2001. It cannot
          be said that the present appellant had in any way instigated
          the deceased to commit suicide or he was responsible for the
          suicide of Pranab Kumar Nag. An offence under 
Section 306
.

 
IPC
 would stand only if there is an abetment for the
          commission of the crime. The parameters of the "abetment"
          have been stated in 
Section 107
 of the Penal Code, 1860.
          
Section 107
 says that a person abets the doing of a thing, who
          instigates any person to do that thing: or engages with one or
          more other person or persons in any conspiracy for the doing
          of that thing, if an act or illegal omission taken place in
          pursuance of that conspiracy, or the person should have
          intentionally aided any act or illegal omission. The explanation
          to. 
Section 107
 says that any willful misrepresentation or willful
          concealment of a material-fact which he is bound to disclose,
          may also come within the contours of "abetment"

          6. In the suicide note, except referring to the name of the
          appellant at two places, there is no reference of any-act or
          incidence where by the appellant herein is alleged to have,
          committed any willful act or omission or intentionally aided or
          instigated the deceased) Pranab Kumar Nag to committing the
          act of suicide. There is no case that the appellant has played
          any part or any role in any conspiracy, which ultimately
          instigated or resulted in the commission of suicide by
          deceased Pranab Kumar Nag."

          7. The prosecution initiated against the appellant would only
          result in sheer harassment to the appellant without any fruitful
          result. In our opinion, the learned single Judge seriously erred
          in holding that the first information report against the appellant
          disclosed the elements of a cognizable offence. There was
          absolutely no ground to proceed against the appellant herein."


30.       
In 
Geo Varghese v. State of Rajasthan17
 the Hon'ble Apex Court at

Paragraph Nos.15 and 16 held as under:




 
"15...The ordinary dictionary meaning of the word 'instigate' is
          to bring about or initiate, incite someone to do something. This
          Court in 
Ramesh Kumar v. State of Chhattisgarh
, (2001) 9
          SCC 618, has defined the word 'instigate' as under:"20.




17


     (2021) 19 SCC 144

                                          25

                                                                                 Dr.YLR, J

                                                                    Crl.R.C.No.44 of 2011

                                                                        Dated 16.06.2025

          Instigation is to goad, urge forward, provoke, incite or
          encourage to do "an act"."

          16. The scope and ambit of 
Section 107
 IPC and its co-
          relation with 
Section 306
 IPC has been discussed repeatedly
          by this Court. 
In the case of 
S.S. Cheena v. Vijay Kumar
          Mahajan
 (2010) 12 SCC 190, it was observed as under:-


                "25. Abetment involves a mental process of
                instigating a person or intentionally aiding a person
                in doing of a thing. Without a positive act on the part
                of the accused to instigate or aid in committing
                suicide, conviction cannot be sustained. The
                intention of the legislature and the ratio of the cases
                decided by the Supreme Court is clear that in order
                to convict a person under 
Section 306
 IPC there has
                to be a clear mens rea to commit the offence. It also
                requires an active act or direct act which led the
                deceased to commit suicide seeing no option and
                that act must have been intended to push the
                deceased into such a position that he committed
                suicide".



31.       
In 
Mariano Anto Bruno v. The Inspector of Police18
 the Hon'ble Apex

Court at Paragraph No.44 held as under:




          "44... It is also to be borne in mind that in cases of alleged
          abetment of suicide, there must be proof of direct or indirect
          acts of incitement to the commission of suicide. Merely on the
          allegation of harassment without their being any positive
          action proximate to the time of occurrence on the part of the
          accused which led or compelled the person to commit suicide,
          conviction in terms of 
Section 306
 IPC is not sustainable."



32.       On a careful analysis and scrutiny of the dying declaration of Chilukuri

Mariyamma, it can be easily discerned that there was no instigation done by

any of the Petitioners goading Chilukuri Mariyamma to commit suicide. There

is no evidence that they had intentionally aided her to commit suicide. There is



18

     2022 SCC OnLine SC 1387

                                        26

                                                                               Dr.YLR, J

                                                                  Crl.R.C.No.44 of 2011

                                                                      Dated 16.06.2025

no evidence that the Petitioners committed abetment of suicide by criminal

conspiracy. On a scrupulous examination of the facts and circumstances of

the case, especially dying declaration of the deceased, there was no positive

action proximate to the time of suicide on the part of the Petitioners which lead

or compelled the deceased to take the extreme step of committing suicide.

Therefore, the conviction under 
Section 306
 of 'the 
I.P.C
.,' sustained by the

learned Trial Court and upheld by the learned Appellate Court are not valid

and legally acceptable inasmuch as there was no positive act on the part of

the Petitioners to instigate or intentionally aided Chilukuri Mariyamma to

commit suicide.





33.   None of the witnesses of the prosecution had spoken that the

Petitioners had entertained a clear mens rea to cause the deceased to commit

suicide. There was neither an active act of direct or indirect on the part of the

Petitioners which lead the deceased to commit suicide seeing no option.

Beating the deceased by the Petitioners on yester-night cannot be

presumable that they intended to push the deceased into such position that

she should commit suicide. As the Petitioners suspected the fidelity of the

deceased, they beat her yester-night of the death of Chilukuri Mariyamma, but

she had felt insulted and resorted to the extreme step.



34.   There was no evidence that the Petitioners instigated Chilukuri

Mariyamma to commit suicide. There was no evidence to the effect that the

                                         27

                                                                               Dr.YLR, J

                                                                  Crl.R.C.No.44 of 2011

                                                                      Dated 16.06.2025

Petitioners either goaded or provoked or instigated or encouraged her to

commit suicide. Therefore, it may not be right to hold that the Petitioners were

guilty of abetment of suicide. The deceased felt insulted or humiliated as her

brother-in-law and husband beat her on the pretext that she had not kept her

matrimonial piousness. The action of the Petitioners is otherwise not ordinarily

expected to induce similarly circumstanced person to commit suicide, the

deceased was hypersensitive, as such, it would not be appropriate and proper

to convict the Petitioners for abetment of suicide.



35.   The prosecution could not establish the guilty mind of the Petitioners

and in furtherance of that state of mind they abetted Chilukuri Mariyamma to

commit suicide. There was no visible and conspicuous presence of element of

mens rea in the case. The act and words of the petitioners, however, insulting

or humiliating the deceased by stating that why should she live, as she was

leading an immoral life, will not by itself constitute abetment of suicide. The

words of the petitioners spoken to the deceased only once, a single instance

i.e., on the preceding night of committing suicide, cannot constitute the

petitioners exploiting the vulnerability of the deceased, making her feel

worthless or undeserving of life, leading her to commit suicide. The

persecution failed to establish that the petitioners, by their acts and their

continuous course of conduct, created a situation which led Chilukuri

Mariyamma to perceive no other option except committing suicide.

                                         28


                                                                                Dr.YLR, J

                                                                   Crl.R.C.No.44 of 2011

                                                                       Dated 16.06.2025


36.    In the result, the Criminal Revision Petition is allowed, setting aside the

impugned judgment of the learned Appellate Court dated 21.12.2010 in

Crl.A.No.29 of 2009 on the file of learned VI Additional District and Sessions

Judge (F.T.C) Krishna, Machilipatnam. Consequently, the judgment of the

learned Trial Court in S.C.No.300 of 2008 dated 09.03.2009 on the file of the

learned Assistant Sessions Judge, Nandigama, is also set aside. There shall

be no order as to costs.



       As a sequel, interlocutory applications, if any pending, shall stand

closed.



                                                 _________________________
                                                   Dr. Y. LAKSHMANA RAO, J
Dt: 16.06.2025
Note: LR copy to be marked
        B/o
        KMS
 

