



[Cites 
7
, Cited by 
0
]




Delhi High Court - Orders


Nitin vs State Of Nct Of Delhi on 21 December, 2023


                                    $~5
                                    *        IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                    +        BAIL APPLN. 4106/2021

                                             NITIN                                                                             ..... Applicant
                                                                                  Through:                 Mr. Rohit Singh, Mr. Sujit Kumar,
                                                                                                           Mr. Prince Kumar and Mr. Vikram
                                                                                                           Singh, Advocates.

                                                                                              Versus

                                             STATE OF NCT OF DELHI                                                            ..... Respondent
                                                           Through:                                        Mr. Ajay Vikram Singh, APP for
                                                                                                           State with Insp. G. R. Meena, PS
                                                                                                           Swaroop Nagar.
                                    CORAM:
                                    HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SAURABH BANERJEE
                                                                                  ORDER

                                    %                                             21.12.2023


                                    1.       The applicant, vide the present application under 
Section 439
 of the
                                    Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 [
CrPC
] seeks regular bail in FIR
                                    No.0043/2018 dated 01.02.2018 registered under Section(s) 498A/304B/
                                    34 of the 
Indian Penal Code
, 1860 [
IPC
] at PS.: Swaroop Nagar, North
                                    West District, Delhi.

                                    2.       As per FIR, the deceased person namely Babita and the applicant
                                    got married on 08.12.2016. Sometime in the evening of 31.01.2018, the
                                    parents of the deceased person were informed by the parents of the
                                    applicant that the deceased person had committed suicide by hanging
                                    herself from the ceiling fan. Thereafter, on the statement of the mother of
                                    the deceased person, the present FIR came to be registered on the very
                                    next day and the applicant was arrested on 01.02.2018.

                                    BAIL APPLN. 4106/2021                                                                            Page 1 of 6


This is a digitally signed order.

The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
The Order is downloaded from the DHC Server on 26/12/2023 at 21:32:15

                                     3.       Learned counsel for the applicant submits that the applicant has
                                    been falsely implicated in the present FIR; and that the testimonies of the
                                    parents of the deceased person have already been recorded, which reflect
                                    that the applicant was not at all involved in the death of the deceased
                                    person and further that their statements recorded before the SDM as well
                                    as before the learned Trial Court reflect only vague allegations as regards
                                    demand of dowry and cruelty meted out to the deceased person; and that
                                    there is no suicide note or any other documentary evidence other than the
                                    uncorroborated testimony of the mother of the deceased person; and that
                                    there is no proximate link with the cruelty, if any, meted out to the
                                    deceased person, as such, the offence under 
Section 304B
 of the IPC is not
                                    made out against the applicant; and that the applicant satisfies the triple
                                    test for grant of bail; and that as per the SDM Report, the applicant was
                                    not even present at the place of the incident and lastly that since at least 12
                                    out of the 15 witnesses have already been examined before the learned
                                    Trial Court and since the trial is likely to take a considerable time to
                                    conclude, therefore, in the interest of justice, the applicant ought to be
                                    released on bail.

                                    4.       This Court, vide its order dated 22.11.2021, issued Notice and
                                    called for the Status Report. Additionally, Nominal Roll was also
                                    requisitioned from the concerned Jail Superintendant. Further, vide order
                                    dated 27.04.2023, the latest Nominal Roll was requisitioned from the
                                    concerned Jail Superintendant.

                                    5.       Learned APP for the State, while opposing grant of bail submits that
                                    the offence(s) as alleged in the FIR are serious in nature; and that the time
                                    gap between the date of marriage and the date of death of the deceased

                                    BAIL APPLN. 4106/2021                                                                  Page 2 of 6





This is a digitally signed order.

The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
The Order is downloaded from the DHC Server on 26/12/2023 at 21:32:15
                                     person is just over a year and the same raises a serious suspicion upon the
                                    role of the applicant; and that the complainant in her statement before the
                                    SDM had raised the allegations as regards demand of dowry and cruelty
                                    meted out to the deceased person; and that the parents of the deceased
                                    person have supported the case of the prosecution; and lastly that since
                                    there are only 2 more formal witnesses left to be examined, therefore, the
                                    trial is likely to conclude soon, as such, the applicant, ought not to be
                                    granted bail in the present application.

                                    6.       As per Nominal Roll, as on 26.05.2023, the applicant has been in
                                    judicial custody for a total period of 2 years, 9 months and 5 days. Further,
                                    the overall jail conduct of the applicant has been „Satisfactory‟.

                                    7.       This Court has heard the learned counsel for the parties and also
                                    perused the documents on record.

                                    8.       An offence under 
Section 304B
 of the IPC, involved in the present
                                    proceedings, has to have the basic ingredients as laid out therein. Firstly, it
                                    is presupposed that "cruelty" has been meted out to the deceased person.
                                    Secondly, the said cruelty is to be coupled with a "demand of dowry". In
                                    essence thereof, any demand of dowry has to be the reason for such
                                    cruelty. Thus, for drawing any such presumption under 
Section 304B
 IPC,
                                    it is necessary that the deceased person was subjected to such cruelty or
                                    harassment in connection with any demand of dowry soon prior to his/ her
                                    death.

                                    9.       In the present proceedings, there are no allegations of that kind.
                                    Thus, there are no elements regarding demand of dowry by the applicant
                                    during the time period when he was married to the deceased person. There
                                    was never anything, much less any formal complaint, made as regards to

                                    BAIL APPLN. 4106/2021                                                                  Page 3 of 6





This is a digitally signed order.

The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
The Order is downloaded from the DHC Server on 26/12/2023 at 21:32:15
                                     any cruelty or demand of dowry at any point of time during the time
                                    period when the deceased person was married to the applicant and was
                                    indeed residing with him. The same holds much significance while this
                                    Court is considering grant of bail to the applicant.

                                    10.      Furthermore, it is also a matter of fact that the present is not a case
                                    involving a suicide note.

                                    11.      In the present proceedings, the applicant has already been behind
                                    bars for a period of almost 3 years and since the trial is likely to take some
                                    time to conclude, therefore, it shall be in the interest of justice, if the
                                    applicant is released on bail.

 
12.      No doubt, though the applicant has been named in the FIR as an
                                    accused, however, till the final outcome of the proceedings emanating
                                    therefrom, the status of the applicant is merely that of a suspect. The
                                    applicant is innocent till proven guilty. As such, keeping the applicant
                                    languishing behind bars during such time, would serve no fruitful purpose.
                                    Also, the same shall be a violation of 
Article 21
 of The Constitution of
                                    India [Re.: 
Hussainara Khatoon & Ors vs Home Secretary, State Of
                                    Bihar
 (1980) 1 SCC 81; 
Satender Kumar Antil vs. Central Bureau of
                                    Investigation
 (2022) 10 SCC 51].


                                    13.      Thus, considering the aforesaid factual scenario coupled with the
                                    legal position at hand, in the interest of justice, this is a fit case to release
                                    the applicant on bail.

                                    14.      Accordingly, the applicant is released on bail in FIR No.0043/2018
                                    dated 01.02.2018 registered under Section(s) 498A/304B/34 of the 
IPC
 at
                                    PS.: Swaroop Nagar, North West District, Delhi, subject to him furnishing
                                    a personal bond in the sum of Rs.50,000/- (Rupees Fifty thousand Only)

                                    BAIL APPLN. 4106/2021                                                                  Page 4 of 6





This is a digitally signed order.

The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
The Order is downloaded from the DHC Server on 26/12/2023 at 21:32:15
                                     along with one surety of the like amount by a family member/ friend
                                    having no criminal case pending against them and subject to the
                                    satisfaction of the learned Trial Court, and further subject to the following
                                    conditions:

                                             i.           Applicant shall not leave the National Capital Territory of
                                             Delhi without prior permission of this Court and shall ordinarily
                                             resideat the address as per prison records. If he wishes to change is
                                             residential address he shall immediately intimate about the same to
                                             the Jail Superintendent by way of an affidavit.

                                             ii.          Applicant shall surrender his passport to the Investigating
                                             Officer, within three days. If he does not possess the same, he shall
                                             filean affidavit before the Investigating Officer to that effect within
                                             the stipulated time.

                                             iii.         Applicant shall appear before the Court as and when the
                                             matter is taken up for hearing.

                                             iv.          Applicant shall join investigation as and when called by the
                                             Investigating Officer concerned. He shall not obstruct or hamper
                                             with the police investigation and shall not play mischief with the
                                             evidence collected oryet to be collected by the Police.



                                             v.           Applicant shall provide all his mobile numbers to the
                                             Investigating Officer concerned which shall be kept in working
                                             condition at all times and shall not switch off or change the mobile
                                             number without prior intimation to the Investigating Officer
                                             concerned. The mobile location be kept on at all times.
                                             vi.          Applicant shall report to the Investigating Officer at PS.:

                                             Swaroop Nagar, North West District, Delhi once in the first week

                                    BAIL APPLN. 4106/2021                                                                  Page 5 of 6





This is a digitally signed order.

The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
The Order is downloaded from the DHC Server on 26/12/2023 at 21:32:15
                                              of every month unless leave of every such absence is obtained
                                             from the learned Trial Court.

                                             vii.         Applicant shall not indulge in any criminal activity and
                                             shall not communicate with or come in contact with any of the
                                             prosecution witnesses, the victim or any member of the victim's
                                             family or tamper with the evidence of the case or try to dissuade
                                             them from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police
                                             officials.

                                    15.      Accordingly, the present application is allowed and disposed of
                                    alongwith the pending application, if any, in the above terms.

                                    16.      Copy of this order be forwarded to the concerned Jail
                                    Superintendent for information and compliance forthwith.

                                    17.      Needless to say, the observations made on the merits of the matter,
                                    if any, are purely for the purposes of adjudication of the present
                                    application and shall not be construed as expressions on the merits of the
                                    matter.



                                                                                                                           SAURABH BANERJEE, J
                                    DECEMBER 21, 2023/akr





                                    BAIL APPLN. 4106/2021                                                                              Page 6 of 6





This is a digitally signed order.

The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
The Order is downloaded from the DHC Server on 26/12/2023 at 21:32:15
 

