



[Cites 
13
, Cited by 
1
]




Supreme Court of India


Udayakumar vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 16 March, 2023


Author: 
Sanjay Karol


Bench: 
B.R. Gavai
, 
Vikram Nath
, 
Sanjay Karol


                                                  1


                                                                   REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1741 OF 2010



                      UDAYAKUMAR                                … APPELLANT

                                                VERSUS

                      STATE OF TAMIL NADU                       … RESPONDENT


                                              JUDGEMENT



                         SANJAY KAROL, J.

 
1. The Appellant Udayakumar (A-2) stands convicted by both

                         the courts below for murdering one Purushothaman, thus

                         having committed an offence punishable under 
Section 302


                         of the Indian Penal Code, 1860. Consequently he is

                         sentenced to suffer imprisonment for life. However, in

                         relation to an offence under 
Section 120-B
 of the Indian

                         Penal Code, 1860 he stands acquitted vide impugned

Signature Not Verified


Digitally signed by


                         judgement delivered by High Court dated 15.03.2010 in

Narendra Prasad


Date: 2023.03.17


16:35:12 IST


Reason:


                                 2



  Criminal Appeal No. 17, 22 and 24 of 2010 titled as

  
Udayakumar & Ors. v. The State of Tamil Nadu
.


2. Significantly,   in   terms   of   the   very   same   impugned

  judgement, the other two co-accused persons namely

  Panneer Dass (A-1) and Periyasamy (A-3) stand acquitted in

  the relation to both the offences i.e. 
Section 302
 and 
Section

  120-B
 of the Penal Code.



3. As a result, the present appeal filed by convict, Udayakumar

  (A-2).





4. Prosecution through the testimonies of 23 witnesses has

  tried to establish complicity of all the three accused on the

  prognosis that Panneer Das (A-1) was having business

  relationship with the deceased (Purushothaman). Since

  certain disputes and business rivalry emerged between the

  two, the former harboured a grudge against the latter.

  Resultantly, he along with A-3 hatched a conspiracy to

  murder the deceased and for achieving such a              design

  services of A-2 were engaged. On 22.10.2008, at about

  8:30PM, A-2 killed the victim with a sickle by giving blows

                             3



  on the side of the neck. Immediately thereafter, A-1 and A-3

  came in a vehicle, in which A-2 fled away from the spot of

  the crime which was an open public road. The incident was

  witnessed by Venkatesan (PW-1) who was known to the

  deceased. With the matter being reported to the police, FIR

  No. 2261 / 2008 dated 22.10.2008 was registered at Police

  Station, Theynampet. The investigation was conducted by

  Police Officer Kuppusamy (PW-23) and after recovering the

  body of the deceased, the post-mortem was conducted by

  Dr. K.Mathiharan (PW-21). Initial investigation revealed

  complicity of A-1 and A-3. As such, the latter was arrested

  on 16.12.2009, who disclosed the cause and the manner of

  commission of crime.



5. With the completion of investigation, challan was presented

  before the Court for Trial. Vide judgment dated 04.12.2009

  in S.C. No. 113 of 2009 titled as State v. Panneerdass & Ors.

  the Ld. Trial Court, convicted all the accused in relation to

  the offences charged for and sentenced them to a term of life

  imprisonment.

                              4


6. Significantly, the High Court, by disbelieving the testimonies

  of   the   prosecution   witnesses,   repelling   the   case   of

  conspiracy, acquitted A-1 and A-3 on all counts and only on

  the basis of identification of A-2 by PW-1, upheld the

  conviction and sentence with respect to the offence

  punishable under 
Section 302
 of the Indian Penal Code. It is

  a matter of record that no appeal against the judgement of

  acquittal of A-1 and A-3 stands preferred by the prosecution

  / State. Hence, this Court has been called upon only to

  examine the guilt or innocence of A-2.



7. We may reiterate that other than the identification of A-2

  being the assailant as witnessed by PW-1, there is no

  material on record, be it of whatsoever nature, linking the

  Appellant to the crime. There is no material to indicate that

  A-1 or A-3 hired the services of A-2 for murdering deceased

  Purushotaman. Further, there is no material indicating the

  accused to have murdered the victim with a sickle, the

  alleged weapon of offence. No tell-tale signs or evidence, be it

  of any nature, scientific or otherwise, is on record, even

  remotely linking the convict to the crime.

                               5


8. Examining the testimony of PW-1, we notice him to have

  firstly reported the matter to the police and in the FIR there

  is no description of the assailant, much less identity of A-2

  to have been disclosed. Yet, the High Court, even while

  discarding the disclosure statement of A-3, convicted A-2,

  which in our considered view has resulted into travesty of

  justice.



9. This Court in the case of 
Anil Phukan v. State of Assam
,

  (1993) 3 SCC 282 has held that:


 
“ 3. … So long as the single eyewitness is a wholly
        reliable witness the courts have no difficulty in basing
        conviction on his testimony alone. However, where the
        single eyewitness is not found to be a wholly reliable
        witness, in the sense that there are some
        circumstances which may show that he could have an
        interest in the prosecution, then the courts generally
        insist upon some independent corroboration of his
        testimony, in material particulars, before recording
        conviction. It is only when the courts find that the
        single eyewitness is a wholly unreliable witness that
        his testimony is discarded in toto and no amount of
        corroboration can cure that defect…”




  Examining the testimony of PW-1, we find him to be

  materially contradicted and his version belied through the

  testimony of the Investigation Officer, (PW-23). This is with

  regard to the identification of the accused. Whereas the

                             6



former states that he identified the accused in front of the

judge, pursuant to the summons issued to him for making

himself available at Pulhal Jail, Chennai for the purpose of

identifying the accused, but the latter, in unequivocal terms

states that, “… it is correct to say that PW-1 would give the

statement that they came to know that the second accused

Udayakumar had murdered Purushothaman” and that “it is

correct to say that only after identifying the accused at the

Police Station, they had identified the accused at the

identification parade.” Now, if the identity of the accused

was already in the knowledge of the police or the witnesses,

then we only wonder, where would the question of

conducting the identification parade arise? We reiterate that

the entire necessity for holding an investigation parade can

arise only when the accused are not previously known to the

witnesses. The whole idea of a test identification parade is that

witnesses who claim to have seen the culprits at the time of

occurrence are to identify them from the midst of other persons

without any aid or any other source. [
Heera v State of

Rajasthan
 (2007) 10 SC 175]. We may also state that the

investigation parade does not hold much value when the identity

                              7



of the accused is already known to the witness.
 
[
Sheikh Sintha

Madhar v. State
, (2016) 11 SCC 265].
             This Court has

elaborately   stated    the       purpose   of   conducting       the

identification parade in the case of State of Maharashtra v.

Suresh, (2000) 1 SCC 471 as:

 
“22. … We remind ourselves that identification
      parades are not primarily meant for the court. They
      are meant for investigation purposes. The object of
      conducting a test identification parade is twofold. First
      is to enable the witnesses to satisfy themselves that
      the prisoner whom they suspect is really the one who
      was seen by them in connection with the commission
      of the crime. Second is to satisfy the investigating
      authorities that the suspect is the real person whom
      the witnesses had seen in connection with the said
      occurrence. So the officer conducting the test
      identification parade should ensure that the said
      object of the parade is achieved. If he permits dilution
      of the modality to be followed in a parade, he should
      see to it that such relaxation would not impair the
      purpose for which the parade is held [vide 
Budhsen v.
      State of U.P.
 (1970) 2 SCC 128; 
Ramanathan v. State
      of T.N.
 (1978) 3 SCC 86].”


Further in 
Gireesan Nair & Others v. State of Kerala


(2023) 1 SCC 180, the Court observed that:




      “44.…this Court has categorically held that where the
      accused has been shown to the witness or even his
      photograph has been shown by the investigating
      officer prior to a TIP, holding an identification parade
      in    such     facts   and    circumstances      remains
      inconsequential.

 
45. Another crucial decision was rendered by this
      Court in 
Sk. Umar Ahmed Shaikh v. State of
      Maharashtra
 (1998) 5 SCC 103, where it was held:


                               8


               8. … But, the question arises : what value
               could be attached to the evidence of identity of
               accused by the witnesses in the Court when
               the accused were possibly shown to the
               witnesses before the identification parade in
               the police station. The Designated Court has
               already recorded a finding that there was
               strong possibility that the suspects were shown
               to the witnesses. Under such circumstances,
               when the accused were already shown to the
               witnesses, their identification in the Court by
               the witnesses was meaningless. The statement
               of witnesses in the Court identifying the
               accused in the Court lost all its value and could
               not be made the basis for recording conviction
               against the accused….”



10. If the theory of conspiracy was disbelieved by the High

   Court then in our considered view, there was no basis or

   reason to have upheld the conviction of A-2, more so, when

   on the basis of the very same set of evidence led by the

   prosecution, the principle conspirators involved in the crime

   were acquitted.



11. Unfortunately in the impugned judgement, there is neither

   any reasoning, nor any appreciation of evidence on record.

   We cannot convict the accused on the basis of the principles

   of preponderance of probability. It is our duty to make sure

   that miscarriage of justice is avoided at all costs and the

   benefit of doubt, if any, given to the accused. [
Sujit Biswas

                                 9



    v. State of Assam
, (2013) 12 SCC 406,            Hanumant

    Govind Nargundkar v. State of M.P. (AIR 1952 SC 343)

    and State v. Mahender Singh Dahiya, (2011) 3 SCC 109].


12. We may also record that in the impugned judgment running

    into 21 pages, the High Court has extensively dealt with the

    theory of conspiracy and guilt of A-1 and A-3 and only in

    the penultimate part, that is, paragraphs 26 and 27,

    casually, dealt with the guilt of the A-3.




13. In our considered view, prosecution has failed to establish

    the guilt of the accused much less meeting the requirement

    of the same having been established beyond reasonable

    doubt.





14. In the present case before us, we find neither the chain of

    evidence to have been completely established nor the

    circumstances, conclusively pointing towards the guilt of

    commission of crime by the Appellant. The prosecution has

    failed to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt. This Court

    has stated essential conditions that must be fulfilled before

    an accused can be convicted in a case revolving around

                              10



    circumstantial evidence in the landmark case of Sharad

    Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Mahrashtra, (1984) 4 SCC


    116.




15. In the normal course of adjudication followed by this Court,

    when there is a concurrent findings of fact by the Courts

    below, this Court interferes only in exceptional cases or

    where gross errors have been committed which overlook

    crying circumstances and well established principles of

    criminal jurisprudence. [
Ramaphupala Reddy v. State of

    Andhra Pradesh
, (1970) 3 SCC 474, Balak Ram v. State

    of U.P., (
1975) 3 SCC 219, Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai V. State

    of Gujarat
, (1983) 3 SCC 217]. Hence in the attending

    circumstances, it becomes our bounden duty to correct

    such findings.




16. To conclude, we state that the judgments of conviction and

    sentence in respect to the appellant present before us,

    Udayakumar (A-2), passed by the Ld. Trial Court in S.C. No.

    113 of 2009 dated 04.12.2009 as affirmed by the High

    Court in Criminal Appeals No. 17, 22 and 24 of 2010 dated

                              11



    15.03.2010 titled as 
Udayakumar & Ors. v. The State of

    Tamil Nadu
 are quashed and set aside.




17. Appeal stands allowed.



18. Since the appellant is already on bail, his bail bond shall

    stand discharged.





                                               ………………J.
                                                (B.R. Gavai)




                                               ……………..…J.
                                               (Sanjay Karol)



    Dated: 16th March, 2023
    Place: New Delhi


