



[Cites 
15
, Cited by 
0
]




Allahabad High Court


Dinesh Kumar Ahirwar vs State Of U.P. on 12 August, 2025


Author: 
Krishan Pahal


Bench: 
Krishan Pahal







HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
 
 


?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:136963
 
Court No. - 65
 

 
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 26033 of 2024
 

 
Applicant :- Dinesh Kumar Ahirwar
 
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
 
Counsel for Applicant :- Ruchita Jain
 
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
 

 
Hon'ble Krishan Pahal,J.
 

1. List has been revised.



2. Heard Ms. Ruchita Jain, learned counsel for the applicant, Sri Sunil Kumar, learned A.G.A. for the State and perused the material placed on record. 



3. Applicant seeks bail in Case Crime No. 128 of 2023, under 
Sections 498A
, 
304B
 I.P.C. and 3/4 
D.P. Act
, Police Station- Kotwali, District- Jhansi, during the pendency of trial. 



4. As per prosecution story, the marriage of the applicant was solemnized with the deceased person as per Hindu Rites six years before her death, the applicant and other family members are stated to have subjected the victim to cruelty for demand of a Motorcycle and a Colour TV as dowry, thereby leading her to death on 07.04.2023. 



5. Learned counsel for the applicant has argued that the applicant is absolutely innocent and has been falsely implicated in the present case. He has nothing to do with the said offence. The FIR is delayed by about four days and there is no explanation of the said delay caused. It is argued that the injury sustained by the deceased person are minor and they are abrasions and contusions only, as such, they could not be the reason for the death of the deceased person. The cause of death was shock as a result of multiple organ failure. Learned counsel for the applicant further stated that deceased was pregnant at that time and due to which rashes emanated out of the said pregnancy. The deceased herself scratched her skin, as such got the said infection and expired. 



6. It is further argued by learned counsel for the applicant that there is no criminal antecedent of the applicant. It is also argued that during trial, P.W.1 who is the mother of the deceased person was examined and she had stated categorically that there was no demand of dowry, as such, it is a clear cut case of false implication. The applicant is languishing in jail since 12.04.2023 and he is ready to cooperate with trial. In case, the applicant is released on bail, he will not misuse the liberty of bail. 



7. Learned A.G.A. has vehemently opposed the bail application.



8. The well-known principle of "Presumption of Innocence Unless Proven Guilty," gives rise to the concept of bail as a rule and imprisonment as an exception. A person's right to life and liberty, guaranteed by 
Article 21
 of the Indian Constitution, cannot be taken away simply because the person is accused of committing an offence until the guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt. 
Article 21
 of the Indian Constitution states that no one's life or personal liberty may be taken away unless the procedure established by law is followed, and the procedure must be just and reasonable. The said principle has been reiterated by the Supreme Court 
inSatender Kumar Antil Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation and Ors.
, 2022 (10) SCC 51.




9. Learned AGA could not bring forth any exceptional circumstances which would warrant denial of bail to the applicant.



10. It is a settled principle of law that the object of bail is to secure the attendance of the accused at the trial. No material particulars or circumstances suggestive of the applicant fleeing from justice or thwarting the course of justice or creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences or intimidating witnesses and the like have been shown by learned AGA.



11. The said viewpoint was shared in 
AIR 1924 Cal 476 Nagendra Nath Chakrabarthi v. King-Emperor
 whereby the High Court held that bail's purpose is to secure the accused's attendance, not to punish. Courts must consider accusation nature, evidence, likely sentence, and accused's character.




12. In Meerut Conspiracy Case, reported in AIR 1931 All 356 ? 
Emperor v. Hutchinson
 and AIR 1931 All 504 ?
 
K. N. Joglekar v. Emperor
 this Court held that High Court's bail power under
 S.498
 CrPC is unfettered but must be exercised judicially. Bail is generally the rule; refusal is exception.




13. 
In 
Sanjay Chandra Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation
, AIR 2012 SC 830 it was reiterated that object of grant of bail to an accused of an offence is neither punitive nor preventive in nature. The true object behind grant of bail is to secure appearance of accused during trial. Refusal of bail and detention of under trial prisoner in jail to an indefinite period violative of 
Article 21
 of the Constitution. The court should keep in view the principle that grant of bail is the rule and committal to jail an exception. Seriousness of the offence is not to be treated as the only consideration in refusing bail.




15. Overcrowding in jails and inordinate delay in disposing of cases often result in undertrial prisoners, who are presumed innocent and incarcerated through no fault of their own, being deprived of their fundamental rights. The failure to ensure a speedy trial despite overcrowding and systemic inefficiencies violates the right to personal liberty under 
Article 21.
 Overcrowding further compounds the problem, as jails house far more inmates than their capacity, with the majority being undertrials which leads to the loss of identity and dignity of prisoners. The state and judiciary are constitutionally mandated to ensure that undertrial prisoners are not wrongfully confined for extended periods and that trials are conducted expeditiously to uphold justice and human dignity. These factors make it entirely justifiable to invoke 
Article 21
 protections in such cases. (See: Inhuman Conditions in 1382 Prisons, In re, (2017) 10 SCC 658; 
State of Rajasthan Vs. Balchand
, AIR 1977 SC 2447;and 
Ashim vs. National Investigation Agency
 (2022) 1 SCC 695)


17. Reiterating the aforesaid view the Supreme Court in the case of 
Manish Sisodia Vs. Directorate of Enforcement
 2024 INSC 595 has again emphasised that the very well-settled principle of law that bail is not to be withheld as a punishment is not to be forgotten. It is high time that the Courts should recognize the principle that ?bail is a rule and jail is an exception?.




18. The Supreme Court in 
Jalaluddin Khan vs. Union of India
, (2024) 10 SCC 574, held that 'bail is the rule, jail is the exception' even in special statutes like the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967
. If the conditions in the special statute for the grant of bail are met, then bail should be granted.




19. This Court had called for the status of trial from the Court concerned. As per the status report dated 07.08.2025 only one witness of fact i.e. the mother of the deceased has been examined as P.W. 1 and P.W.2 is the Constable Clerk and P.W.3 is formal witness and has nothing to do with the said offence. 



20. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, submissions made by learned counsel for the parties, the evidence on record, and taking into consideration the fact that only one witness of fact has been examined at trial and applicant having been incarcerated for a considerable period of time and without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case, the Court is of the view that the applicant has made out a case for bail. The bail application is allowed.



21. Let the applicant- Dinesh Kumar Ahirwar, who is involved in aforementioned case crime be released on bail on his furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the court concerned subject to following conditions. Further, before issuing the release order, the sureties be verified.



(i) The applicant shall not tamper with evidence during trial.
 

(ii) The applicant shall not pressurize/intimidate the prosecution witnesses.
 

(iii) The applicant shall appear before the trial court on the date fixed. 
 

22. In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.



23. It is made clear that observations made in granting bail to the applicant shall not in any way affect the learned trial Judge in forming his independent opinion based on the testimony of the witnesses.



Order Date :- 12.8.2025
 
Karan
 

 
(Justice Krishan Pahal) 
 



 




 

 
 
    
      
  
 

