



[Cites 
8
, Cited by 
0
]




Madhya Pradesh High Court


Hemant Parihar vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 26 February, 2024


Author: 
Sanjeev S Kalgaonkar


Bench: 
Sanjeev S Kalgaonkar


                                                              1
                            IN     THE       HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
                                                   AT GWALIOR
                                                     BEFORE
                                   HON'BLE SHRI JUSTICE SANJEEV S KALGAONKAR
                                               ON THE 26 th OF FEBRUARY, 2024
                                           MISC. CRIMINAL CASE No. 4921 of 2024

                           BETWEEN:-
                           HEMANT PARIHAR, AGED ABOUT 20 YEARS,
                           OCCUPATION: LABOUR RESIDENT OF      VILLAGE
                           KALYAANPUR POLICE STATION PICCHORE TEHSIL
                           DABRA DISTRICT GWALIOR (MADHYA PRADESH)

                                                                                               .....APPLICANT
                           (SHRI SANKALP SHARMA-ADVOCATE FOR APPLICANT)

                           AND
                           THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH THROUGH POLICE
                           STATION DABRA DISTRICT GWALIOR    (MADHYA
                           PRADESH)

                                                                                          .....RESPONDENT
                           ( SHRI R.K. AWASTHI- ADVOCATE FOR APPLICANT- STATE AND SMT.
                           UMA KUSHWAH- ADVOCATE FOR COMPLAINANT)

                                 This application coming on for hearing this day, the court passed the
                           following:
                                                               ORDER

                                 IA No. 2552 of 2024, an application under 
Section 301(2)
of CrPC
                           moved on behalf of complainant seeking permission of this Court to assist
                           prosecution in the matter is taken up, considered and allowed for the reasons
                           mentioned therein. Smt. Uma Kushwah, learned Counsel appearing for
                           complainant is permitted to assist the prosecution in the matter.

                                 This first bail application has been filed by applicant under 
Section 439

                           of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 for grant of bail in connection with
                           Crime No.1155 of 2023, registered at Police Station Dabra, District Gwalior

Signature Not Verified


Signed by: MAHENDRA


BARIK


Signing time: 27-02-2024


10:10:25 PM


                                                               2


                           (M.P.) for offence punishable under 
Section 376
, 
450
, 
323
 of IPC. Applicant is
                           in judicial custody since 29-12-2023.

                                 As per the case of prosecution, victim aged around 19 years, submitted a
                           typed complaint on 29-12-2023 at 10:15 am with SHO, PS Dabra, District
                           Gwalior alleging rape against Hemant Parihar (applicant). It is stated in
                           complaint that she and Hemant Parihar used to communicate on mobile phone.
                           Some days before, she had stopped conversation with Hemant but Hemant
                           used to call her. On 28-12-2023 around 10:00 in the night, she was at her home
                           along with her younger brothers and uncle. Her brother went outside with pet
                           dog. Hemant entered her room and closed door. Hemant committed rape on

                           her. Hemant pushed her. She sustained injury near her left eye. Hemant also
                           slapped her. Hearing her shouts, her uncle and younger brothers came there,
                           then Hemant left her. She opened the door, Hemant fled away. Her uncle
                           informed her father on phone. Her parents had gone to Gwalior, therefore, she
                           could not report in the night. On such allegations, PS Dabra registered FIR at
                           Crime No.1155 of 2023 for offence punishable under 
Sections 376
, 
450
, 
323
 of
                           IPC against applicant. Victim was forwarded for medico-legal examination.
                           Victim informed the history of sexual violence to the Medical Officer that
                           accused had come to her room around 10:00 pm. Accused forced her for
                           having sexual relation. When she denied, accused forcefully had sexual
                           intercourse with her. Suddenly, her relative came there and saw them in
                           uncomfortable condition and caught them. No external injury was found on the
                           person of the victim. Statements of the victim under 
Sections 161
 and 
164
 of
                           CrPC were recorded. Statements of other witnesses have also been recorded.
                           Applicant was arrested on 29-12-2023, he is in custody ever since. On


Signature Not Verified


Signed by: MAHENDRA


BARIK


Signing time: 27-02-2024


10:10:25 PM


                                                                3

                           completion of investigation, Final Report was submitted on 17-01-2024.

                                 Learned Counsel for the applicant, in addition to the grounds mentioned
                           in the application, submits that it is a case of consensual romantic relationship
                           between two young persons. Applicant has been falsely implicated in the matter
                           under the pressure of family members of the victim. Leaned Counsel further
                           referring to the site map and narration of history by the victim to Medical
                           Officer, submits that the allegation of forceful sexual assault is highly
                           improbable as younger brothers and uncle of the victim were present in the
                           same house although in different room. Learned Counsel further submits that
                           the applicant is aged 19 years. He is pursuing studies. He is a student of BA
                           first year. There is no likelihood of his absconsion leaving his family, home and
                           studies. No further custodial interrogation of applicant is needed. There is no
                           likelihood of tampering with evidence as both the parties belong to same socio-
                           economic status. Trial would take time to conclude. Therefore, applicant may
                           be extended the benefit of bail.

                                 P e r contra, learned counsel for the State ably assisted by learned
                           Counsel for the complainant opposes the bail application on the ground of
                           gravity of alleged offence and submits that statements of victim on record make
                           out a case of sexual assault against applicant. Learned Counsel for State further
                           cites criminal history of two cases against the applicant.



                                 In reply, learned Counsel for the applicant submits that other two cases
                           relate to minor offence.Applicant has been granted bail in two cases which are
                           pending for trial and he has never been convicted.

                                 Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the case diary.
                                 Considering the arguments advanced by both the parties and overall
                           circumstances of the case, regard being had to the young age of the applicant,

Signature Not Verified


Signed by: MAHENDRA


BARIK


Signing time: 27-02-2024


10:10:25 PM


                                                                    4

                           but without commenting on merits of the case, this Court is inclined to release
                           the applicant on bail. Thus, the application is allowed.

                                  Accordingly, it is directed that applicant- Hemant Parihar s hall be
                           released on bail in relation to Crime No.1155 of 2023, registered at Police
                           Station Dabra, District Gwalior (M.P.) for offence punishable under 
Section
                           376
, 
450
, 
323
 of I P C upon furnishing a personal bond in the sum of
                           Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees one lac only) with one solvent surety to the
                           satisfaction of the Trial Court, for compliance with the following conditions,:

                           (For the sake of convenience of understanding by accused and surety, the
                           conditions of bail are also reproduced in Hindi as under):-

                                  (1) Applicant shall remain present on every date of hearing as may be
                           directed by the concerned court;

                                  (1) vkosnd lacaf/kr U;k;ky; ds funZs'kkuqlkj lquokbZ dh izR;sd frfFk ij mifLFkr jgsxkA

                                  (2) Applicant shall not commit or get involved in any offence of similar
                           nature;

                                  (2) vkosnd leku izd`fr dk dksbZ vijk/k ugha djsxk ;k mlesa lfEefyr ugha gksxkA

                                  (3) Applicant shall not directly or indirectly make any inducement, threat
                           or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to
                           dissuade them/him/her from disclosing such facts to the Court or to the police
                           officer;

                                  (3) vkosnd izdzj.k ds rF;ksa ls ifjfpr fdlh O;fDr dks izR;{k ;k vizR;{k :i ls
                           izyksHku] /kedh ;k opu ugha nsxk] ftlls ,slk O;fDr ,sls rF;ksa dks U;k;ky; ;k iqfyl vf/kdkjh
                           dks izdV djus ls fuokfjr gksA

                                  (4) Applicant shall not directly or indirectly attempt to tamper with the
                           evidence or allure, pressurize or threaten the witness;



Signature Not Verified


Signed by: MAHENDRA


BARIK


Signing time: 27-02-2024


10:10:25 PM


                                                                      5


                                  (4) vkosnd izR;{k ;k vizR;{k :i ls lk{; ds lkFk NsMNkM djus dk ;k lk{kh ;k
                           lkf{k;ksa dks cgykus&Qqlykus] ncko Mkyus ;k /kedkus dk iz;kl ugha djsxkA

                                 (5) During trial, the applicant shall ensure due compliance of provisions of
                           
Section 309
 of Cr.P.C. regarding examination of witnesses in attendance;

                                  (5) fopkj.k ds nkSjku] mifLFkr xokgksa ls ijh{k.k ds laca/k esa vkosnd /kkjk 309 na-iz-la- ds
                           izko/kkuksa dk mfpr vuqikyu lqfuf'pr djsxkA

                                  This order shall be effective till the end of trial. However, in case of
                           breach of any of the precondition of bail, the trial Court may consider on merit
                           cancellation of bail without any impediment of this order.

                                  The trial Court shall get these conditions reproduced on the
                           personal bond by the accused and on surety bond by the surety
                           concerned. If any of them is unable to write, the scribe shall certify that
                           he had explained the conditions to the concerned accused or the surety.

                                  C.C. as per rules.



                                                                                     (SANJEEV S KALGAONKAR)
                                                                                             JUDGE
                           MKB





Signature Not Verified


Signed by: MAHENDRA


BARIK


Signing time: 27-02-2024


10:10:25 PM


 

