



[Cites 
14
, Cited by 
0
]




Delhi High Court - Orders


Raghubir Singh @ Raghuveer Singh Mehto vs State Of Nct Of Delhi Through Sho Madhu ... on 7 March, 2024


                                      $~13
                                      *    IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

                                      +           BAIL APPLN. 304/2024

                                                  RAGHUBIR SINGH @ RAGHUVEER SINGH
                                                  MEHTO                            ..... Petitioner
                                                               Through: Mr. Chayan Sarkar and
                                                                        Mr. Shailendra Kumar,
                                                                        Advs.

                                                                                     versus

                                                  STATE OF NCT OF DELHI THROUGH SHO
                                                  MADHU VIHAR POLICE STATION, EAST
                                                  DELHI & ANR.                     ..... Respondents
                                                                Through: Mr. Utkarsh, APP for the
                                                                         State with Insp. Sandeep
                                                                         Rathi, PS Madhu Vihar.
                                                                         Mr. Sunil Kumar, Mr.
                                                                         Prashant Rana and Mr.
                                                                         Shubham Thakur, Advs.
                                                                         for the complainant.

                                                  CORAM:
                                                  HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AMIT MAHAJAN
                                                               ORDER

                                      %                        07.03.2024


                                      1.          The present petition is filed under 
Section 439
 of the Code
                                      of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (
CrPC
), seeking grant of regular
                                      bail, in FIR No. 315/2023 dated 08.07.2023, registered at Police
                                      Station            Madhu              Vihar,           for         offences          under   
Sections
                                      498A
/
302
/
304B
/
34
 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (
IPC
).

                                      2.          The FIR was registered on a complaint given by the
                                      brother of the deceased.

                                      3.          It is stated that the marriage between the complainant's
                                      sister and the son of the applicant took place on 27.04.2021. It is
                                      alleged that soon after the marriage, the deceased was subjected

                                      BAIL APPLN. 304/2024                                                                         Page 1 of 7

This is a digitally signed order.

The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
The Order is downloaded from the DHC Server on 29/03/2024 at 21:15:02
                                       to cruelty and physical assault by her husband and his family
                                      members on a regular basis.

                                      4.          It is alleged that on 05.07.2023, at around 10:00 p.m., the
                                      deceased was beaten and was confined in a room. Thereafter,
                                      when her health deteriorated, she was taken to GTB Hospital on
                                      the same day.

                                      5.          The deceased succumbed to her injuries on 07.07.2023.

                                      6.          It is alleged that the deceased was threatened on a regular
                                      basis by her husband and his family members. On 08.07.2023,
                                      the complainant was informed by his other sister that the
                                      deceased was beaten by her husband and his family members.

                                      7.          The postmortem of the deceased was conducted on
                                      09.07.2023 which revealed fifteen external and various internal
                                      injuries that had been inflicted on the deceased. The opinion in
                                      the postmortem report stipulated that the death of the deceased
                                      occurred due to coma as a result of antemortem cerebral damage
                                      consequent upon blunt force impact to the head and all injuries
                                      were antemortem in nature and produced by blunt force.

                                      8.          During the course of investigation, subsequent opinion
                                      from the autopsy surgeon on the postmortem report was also
                                      obtained, which showed that various injuries were caused three
                                      to four days prior to the death and these injuries were inflicted by
                                      hitting the head of the deceased on the wall and by slapping her.

                                      9.          The charge sheet in the present case has already been filed.

                                      10.         On the receipt of the present complaint, enquiry under
                                      
Section 176
 of the CrPC was initiated and the statement of the
                                      complainant was recorded. In the said statement, it was stated
                                      that the deceased was 8 months' pregnant and was constantly
                                      beaten by her husband under the influence of alcohol. It was also
                                      stated that on 05.07.2023, the other sister of the complainant had

                                      BAIL APPLN. 304/2024                                                                 Page 2 of 7

This is a digitally signed order.

The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
The Order is downloaded from the DHC Server on 29/03/2024 at 21:15:02
                                       received a video-call from the deceased at around 12 midnight, in
                                      which she was crying a lot and told her that her husband had
                                      beaten her and she was in a lot of pain and was also vomiting.

                                      11.         The learned counsel for the applicant submits that the
                                      applicant has been falsely implicated in the present case. He
                                      submits that the applicant is the Father-in-Law of the deceased
                                      and the allegations are primarily against the husband of the
                                      deceased (son of the applicant).

                                      12.         He submits that since the beginning of the marriage, the
                                      deceased was living separately on the first floor with her husband
                                      and the applicant used to reside on the ground floor.

                                      13.         He further submits that the FIR was initially registered
                                      under 
Sections 323
/
341
/
506
/
34
 of the IPC and it was only upon
                                      the unfortunate death of the deceased that, 
Sections 304(B)
 and
                                      
302
 of the IPC were added in the chargesheet.

                                      14.         He submits that from the bare perusal of the chargesheet,
                                      even if the allegations are prima facie taken to be correct, the
                                      applicant can be tried only under 
Section 498A
 of the IPC. He
                                      submits that the applicant had readily surrendered and cooperated
                                      with the investigation.

                                      15.         He submits that the charge sheet in the present case has
                                      already been filed and the applicant is in custody since
                                      10.07.2023 and no purpose would be served by keeping the
                                      applicant in further incarceration.

                                      16.         The learned Additional Public Prosecutor for the State has
                                      opposed the grant of bail on the ground that the allegations are
                                      very heinous in nature and there are specific allegations against
                                      the applicant.

                                      17.         He submits that the postmortem report indicated that the
                                      deceased was beaten and was not provided any medical help at

                                      BAIL APPLN. 304/2024                                                                 Page 3 of 7

This is a digitally signed order.

The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
The Order is downloaded from the DHC Server on 29/03/2024 at 21:15:02
                                       the most needed time.

                                      18.         I have heard learned counsel for the parties.

                                      19.         
Section 304B
 of IPC reads as under:

                                                         "304B. Dowry death
                                                         (1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or
                                                         bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal
                                                         circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is
                                                         shown that soon before her death she was subjected to
                                                         cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of
                                                         her husband for, or in connection with, any demand for
                                                         dowry, such death shall be called "dowry death", and
                                                         such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused
                                                         her death. Explanation.--For the purpose of this sub-

                                                         section, "dowry" shall have the same meaning as in
                                                         
section 2
 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).
                                                         (2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with
                                                         Imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven
                                                         years but which may extend to imprisonment for life."



                                      20.         The presumption in law of a 'dowry death' is meant to act
                                      as a deterrent to the demand of dowry and to ensure that there is
                                      no victimization because of that. The basic ingredient to attract
                                      the provisions of 
Section 304B
, IPC, is, firstly, that the death of
                                      the woman should have occurred under circumstances which are
                                      not normal. The conviction, by applying the provisions of
                                      
Section 304B
, IPC, is essentially based on the presumption that
                                      would necessarily mean that circumstances which are not normal
                                      or essentially the one where the reason of death is not
                                      ascertained.

 
21.         The interpretation of 
Sections 304B
 and 
498A
 IPC came
                                      up for consideration in 
Baijnath v. State of M.P
: (2017 1 SCC


                                      101). The relevant paras are extracted below:-



                                      BAIL APPLN. 304/2024                                                                 Page 4 of 7


This is a digitally signed order.

The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
The Order is downloaded from the DHC Server on 29/03/2024 at 21:15:02

                                                     25. Whereas in the offence of dowry death defined by Section
                                                    304-B of the Code, the ingredients thereof are:

                                                    (i) death of the woman concerned is by any burns or bodily
                                                    injury or by any cause other than in normal circumstances,
                                                    and

                                                    (ii) is within seven years of her marriage, and

                                                    (iii) that soon before her death, she was subjected to cruelty or
                                                    harassment by her husband or any relative of the husband for,
                                                    or in connection with, any demand for dowry.

                                                    The offence under Section 498-A of the Code is attracted qua
                                                    the husband or his relative if she is subjected to cruelty. The
                                                    Explanation to this Section exposits "cruelty" as:

                                                    (i) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to
                                                    drive the woman to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or
                                                    danger to life, limb or health (whether mental or physical), or

                                                    (ii) harassment of the woman, where such harassment is with a
                                                    view to coercing her or any person related to her to meet any
                                                    unlawful demand for any property or valuable security or is on
                                                    account of failure by her or any person related to her to meet
                                                    such demand.

                                                    26.Patently thus, cruelty or harassment of the lady by her
                                                    husband or his relative for or in connection with any demand
                                                    for any property or valuable security as a demand for dowry
                                                    or in connection therewith is the common constituent of both
                                                    the offences.

                                                    27. The expression "dowry" is ordained to have the same
                                                    meaning as in 
Section 2
 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961.
                                                    The expression "cruelty", as explained, contains in its
                                                    expanse, apart from the conduct of the tormentor, the
                                                    consequences precipitated thereby qua the lady subjected
                                                    thereto. Be that as it may, cruelty or harassment by the
                                                    husband or any relative of his for or in connection with any
                                                    demand of dowry, to reiterate, is the gravamen of the two
                                                    offences.



                                      22.         The law presumes that deaths which are not normal, if had
                                      happened within seven years of the date of marriage and the
                                      victim was subjected to cruelty in connection with demand of
                                      dowry made before her death would be termed as dowry death.
                                      The allegations of cruelty levelled against the applicant will be
                                      tested in trial and at this stage considering an application for bail
                                      only the parameters enshrined in that regard are to be considered.

                                      23.         In the present case there are no specific allegations against
                                      the applicant in regard to the demand of dowry soon before the
                                      death of the victim. It is true that general allegations have been

                                      BAIL APPLN. 304/2024                                                                 Page 5 of 7

This is a digitally signed order.

The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
The Order is downloaded from the DHC Server on 29/03/2024 at 21:15:02
                                       levelled of the victim being subjected to cruelty and physical
                                      assault by her husband and his family members, however, no
                                      specific allegation has been made against the applicant in regard
                                      to the cruelty in connection with any demand of dowry soon
                                      before the death of the victim.

                                      24.         It has specifically been alleged that the victim was
                                      subjected to physical assault by her husband soon before her
                                      death. It is alleged that the victim had made a phone call to her
                                      sister two days before her death complaining that her husband
                                      had beaten her and she was in lot of pain and was also vomiting.
                                      It is not alleged that the victim was physically assaulted by the
                                      applicant.

                                      25.         It was contended that the applicant was also responsible
                                      since he did not provide the timely medical help to the victim.
                                      The learned counsel for the applicant, however, pointed out that
                                      the applicant has been staying on a separate floor and was,
                                      therefore, not aware of the victim being physically assaulted by
                                      his son. The allegation and the defence in this regard would be
                                      tested during the course of the trial.

                                      26.         The object of jail is to secure the appearance of the
                                      accused persons during the trial. The object is neither punitive
                                      nor preventive and the deprivation of liberty has been considered
                                      as a punishment. The applicant cannot be made to spend the
                                      entire period of trial in custody especially when the trial is likely
                                      to take considerable time. The presence of the accused can be
                                      secured at the time of trial by putting appropriate conditions.

                                      27.         Without commenting further on the merits of the case,
                                      keeping the facts and circumstances in mind and the fact that the
                                      trial is likely to take some time, I am satisfied that the applicant
                                      has made out a case for grant of regular bail.

                                      BAIL APPLN. 304/2024                                                                 Page 6 of 7


This is a digitally signed order.

The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
The Order is downloaded from the DHC Server on 29/03/2024 at 21:15:03

                                       28.         The applicant is, therefore, directed to be released on bail
                                      on furnishing a bail bond for a sum of ₹50,000/- with one surety
                                      of the like amount, subject to the satisfaction of learned Trial
                                      Court / Duty Metropolitan Magistrate on the following
                                      conditions:

                                                        a. He shall under not leave the country without the
                                                              permission of the learned Trial Court;

                                                        b. He shall appear before the learned Trial Court on
                                                              every date of hearing;

                                                        c. He shall not, in any manner, try to contact any of the
                                                              witnesses;

                                                        d. He shall upon his release provide his mobile number
                                                              to the investigating officer/SHO which shall be kept
                                                              in working condition at all times.

                                      29.         In the event of there being any FIR/DD entry/ complaint
                                      lodged against the applicant, it would be open to the State to seek
                                      redressal by filing an appropriate application for cancellation of
                                      bail.

                                      30.         It is clarified that the observations made in the present
                                      order are for the purpose of deciding the present bail application,
                                      and should not influence the outcome of the Trial. The said
                                      observations should not be taken as an expression of opinion on
                                      the merits of the case.

                                      31.         The present application is allowed in aforementioned
                                      terms.



                                                                                                                     AMIT MAHAJAN, J
                                      MARCH 7, 2024
                                      'KDK'/HK


                                      BAIL APPLN. 304/2024                                                                     Page 7 of 7

This is a digitally signed order.

The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
The Order is downloaded from the DHC Server on 29/03/2024 at 21:15:03
 

