



[Cites 
5
, Cited by 
1
]




Madhya Pradesh High Court


Dasrath Bhagel vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 July, 2023


Author: 
Rohit Arya


Bench: 
Rohit Arya


                                                             1
                                      IN THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
                                                   AT GWALIOR
                                                     CRA No. 1045 of 2017
                                      (DASRATH BHAGEL AND OTHERS Vs THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH)

                          Dated : 03-07-2023
                                Shri R.K. Shrivastava- Advocate for the appellants.

                                Shri S.S. Kushwaha- Public Prosecutor for the State.
                                Heard on I.A.No.14014/2022 which is third repeat application under
                          
Section 389(1)
 Cr.P.C. filed on behalf of appellant No.5- Smt. Kamla Devi
                          Baghel for suspension of sentence and grant of bail.
                                Present appellant stood convicted for the offence punishable under

                          
Section 302
/
34
 IPC and sentenced to life imprisonment with fine of Rs.2000/-;
                          under 
Section 304(B)
 IPC and sentenced to life imprisonment with fine of
                          Rs.2000/- and under 
Section 498A
 of IPC and sentenced to undergo RI for two
                          years with fine of Rs.1,000/-, with default stipulations vide judgment of
                          conviction and sentence dated 29.06.2017 passed in Sessions Trial No.
                          265/2013.
                                A s per prosecution story, deceased Gyankunwar was married to co-
                          accused Dashrath S/o Lajjaram of village Phule Ka Pura. It is alleged that there
                          has been constant demand of two wheeler from parents of the deceased by her

                          in-laws and other family members including present appellant. As demand was
                          not fulfilled, she was mentally harassed and also physically tortured. Several
                          family members of the deceased including parents had visited the house of her
                          inlaws on 13.07.2013 where Panchayat was called. The in-laws and other family
                          members of the deceased were persuaded that the deceased shall not be dealt
                          with such alleged cruelty and harassment. The parents of the deceased had
                          come back. However, at about 12 in the night on same day, i.e., 13.07.2013, on
Signature Not Verified
Signed by: SUNEEL DUBEY
Signing time: 7/4/2023
11:42:07 AM
                                                                  2
                          telephone, it was informed that the deceased has passed away. They rushed to
                          the house on the following morning and found injuries on different parts of the
                          b o d y of the deceased. Accordingly, FIR was lodged. Investigation started.
                          Upon collection of incriminating material placed on record, challan was filed
                          and case was committed to the Sessions Court. The learned Sessions Court,
                          after critical evaluation of the evidence on record, has convicted and sentenced
                          the present appellant, as aforesaid.
                                Shri Shrivastava, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant
                          No.5, while taking exception to the impugned judgment, inter alia, submits that
                          present appellant has already undergone jail sentence of six years eight months.

                          No direct overt act is attributed to the present appellant in any manner
                          whatsoever. Omnibus allegations have been made against her by one
                          Ramprakash allegedly having witnessed the scene of occurrence of the incident
                          when the deceased was allegedly beaten which led to her death. Even he has not
                          attributed any specific allegation of particular overt act on the part of the present
                          appellant in the matter of allegedly beating the deceased. It is further submitted
                          by learned counsel that co-accused/appellants No.2 and 3 have been extended
                          the benefit of suspension of sentence and grant of bail vide order dated
                          14.06.2023 and the case of the present appellant is akin to that of co-
                          accused/appellants No.2 and 3 and thus prays for suspension of sentence and
                          grant of bail on her behalf.
                                Per contra, Shri S.S. Kushwah, learned Public Prosecutor appearing on
                          behalf of the respondent/State, opposes the application supporting the


                          impugned judgment with submission that the trial Court after critical examination
                          of the evidence placed on record has come to the conclusion and convicted the
                          present appellant along with other co-accused persons and hence, no exception

Signature Not Verified


Signed by: SUNEEL DUBEY


Signing time: 7/4/2023


11:42:07 AM


                                                               3

                          can be taken in the matter of suspension of sentence.

                                Upon hearing learned counsel for the parties, though this Court refrains
                          from commenting on rival contentions touching the merits of the case, but
                          regard being had to the fact that the present appellant so far has undergone the
                          incarceration of 06 years and 08 months and co-accused/appellants No.2 and 3
                          have been extended the benefit of suspension of sentence and grant of bail vide
                          order dated 14.06.2023, we are of the view that the present appellant deserves
                          to be benefited by suspension of sentence by allowing the instant application.

                                Accordingly, it is directed that the jail sentence of appellant No.5- Smt.
                          Kamla Devi Baghel remain suspended and she be released on bail on furnishing
                          a personal bond in the sum of Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees One Lac only) with one
                          solvent surety in the like amount to the satisfaction of the trial Court. Appellant
                          No.5- Smt. Kamla Devi Baghel is directed to appear before the Registry of this
                          Court first on 28.08.2023 and on other subsequent dates as may be fixed in
                          this behalf with following further conditions:-

                                ( i ) the concerned jail authorities are directed that before releasing
                          appellant No.5- Smt. Kamla Devi Baghel, her medical examination be conducted
                          through the jail doctor and if it is prima facie found that she is having any
                          symptom of COVID-19, then the consequential follow up action or any further
                          test required be undertaken immediately. If not, present appellant shall be

                          released on bail in terms of the conditions imposed in this order ;

                                (ii) violation of conditions, State is free to apply for cancellation of bail.

                                Accordingly, the I.A. stands allowed and disposed of.

                                Observations on facts, if any, are only for the purpose of disposal of the
                          instant application for suspension of sentence and shall have no bearing on the


Signature Not Verified


Signed by: SUNEEL DUBEY


Signing time: 7/4/2023


11:42:07 AM


                                                                    4

                          merits of the appeal.

                                    Certified copy as per rules.



                             (ROHIT ARYA)                              (MILIND RAMESH PHADKE)
                                JUDGE                                           JUDGE

                          (Dubey)





Signature Not Verified


Signed by: SUNEEL DUBEY


Signing time: 7/4/2023


11:42:07 AM


 

