



[Cites 
12
, Cited by 
2
]




Patna High Court


Anita Devi vs Satish Kumar on 25 September, 2020


Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 PAT 565


Author: 
Dinesh Kumar Singh


Bench: 
Dinesh Kumar Singh
, 
Prabhat Kumar Singh


    IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA
                   Miscellaneous Appeal No.81 of 2014
======================================================
Anita Devi D/O Shri Ramprit Yadav Resident Of Village Rakri, P.S.
Nawadah, District Bhojpur At Ara, At Present Residing At Mohallah Kazipur,
Nayatoala, P.O. Bankipore, P.S. Kadamkuan, District Patna.

                                                        ... ... Appellant/s
                                   Versus
Satish Kumar S/O Shri Lakshman Prasad Resident Of Village Pakri, P.O. Ara,
P.S. Ara Nawadah, District Bhojpur.

                                          ... ... Respondent/s
======================================================
Appearance :
For the Appellant/s    :     Mr.Manoj Priyadarshi, Advocate
For the Respondent/s   :     Mr. Anil Kumar Singh, Advocate
======================================================
CORAM: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE DINESH KUMAR SINGH
        and
        HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE PRABHAT KUMAR SINGH
ORAL JUDGMENT
(Per: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE DINESH KUMAR SINGH)

 Date : 25-09-2020

              The present Miscellaneous Appeal is directed against

 the judgment and decree dated 27.7.2013 and 12.8.2013

 respectively, passed by the learned Additional Principal Judge,

 Family Court, Patna in Matrimonial Case No. 763 of 2012,

 whereby the marriage between the appellant and the respondent

 has been dissolved and a decree of divorce has been passed on

 the ground of cruelty.

             The factual matrix of the case is that the marriage

 between the appellant wife and the respondent husband was

 admittedly performed on 13.2.2000 but the appellant wife

 always treated the respondent husband with cruelty. As a result,
 Patna High Court MA No.81 of 2014 dt.25-09-2020
                                           2/18




         the respondent preferred Matrimonial Case No. 763 of 2012

         seeking dissolution of marriage on the ground of cruelty and

         desertion, though it is also alleged that the appellant was in love

         affair with some person. The respondent pleaded in the plaint of

         the matrimonial case alleging that the appellant used to abuse

         him and his parents. The appellant used to take William -10 or

         Mandex and other drugs. On protest being made by the

         respondent husband, the appellant wife threatened him that she

         will commit suicide. The appellant did not allow the respondent

         to have physical relationship. The appellant admitted that she

         has relationship with some boy but on the pressure of the family

         members, she has been married with the respondent. The

         appellant left the matrimonial house on 7.3.2000 and since then

         she is residing with her parents. The appellant has filed a

         criminal case being Complaint Case No. 2231C of 2002 with

         accusation under 
Section 498A
 of the IPC and 
Sections 3
 and 
4


         of the Dowry Prohibition Act on 23.10.2002 and in the said case

         the respondent husband had to remain in custody for about three

         weeks. The respondent husband initially filed a Judicial

         Separation Case No. 20 of 2001 under 
Section 10
 of the Hindu

         Marriage Act (hereinafter referred to as the Act) before the

         learned District Judge, Bhojpur for grant of judicial separation.
 Patna High Court MA No.81 of 2014 dt.25-09-2020
                                           3/18




         Later on the same was converted into Matrimonial Case No. 763

         of 2012.

                    The appellant wife appeared in the matrimonial case,

         filed her written statement claiming that the matrimonial case is

         not maintainable and the same has been filed in retaliation to the

         complaint lodged by the appellant. The appellant was tortured

         for non-fulfillment of further dowry demand of a Hero Honda

         motorcycle and Rupees Fifty Thousand for starting business by

         the respondent. The appellant claimed neither to have

         misbehaved or committed cruelty nor to have taken any drug

         and there is no proof with regard to that. The appellant is still

         ready to resume the conjugal life and she claims to have left the

         matrimonial house on 1.10.2002. No effort was made to

         reconcile the issue and the appellant never had any relationship

         with any boy and has not made any admission to that effect

         before the respondent and neither the name of the boy has been

         disclosed nor he has been made party to the proceeding.

                     The learned Family Court framed the following issues:

                               "1.Is   the suit as framed maintainable?

                               2.Has the petitioner got valid cause of action
                         for he suit?

                                3.Whether the respondent has committed
 Patna High Court MA No.81 of 2014 dt.25-09-2020
                                           4/18




                         cruelty      with the petitioner and his family
                         members?

                                4.Whether the respondent has deserted the
                         petitioner?

                                 5.Whether the petitioner is entitled for
                         dissolution of his marriage by a decree of divorce?

                                6.To what relief or reliefs, if any is the
                         petitioner entitled?"

                       The respondent husband examined four witnesses. P.

         W. 1 Mahakant Prasad, neighbour of the respondent, P.W. 2

         Hare Krishan Singh, another neighbour of the respondent, P.W.

         3 Satish Kumar, the respondent husband himself and P.W. 4 Anil

         Kumar, brother of the respondent husband. To prove the case of

         cruelty, the respondent husband has got the certified copy of

         Complaint Case No. 2232C of 2002 exhibited as Ext. 1 and the

         copy of the order dated 19.8.2008 passed by the Patna High

         Court in Cr. Revision No.551 of 2007 and other certified copies

         of the petitions and affidavits have also been exhibited.

                    The appellant wife also examined seven witnesses. O.P.

         Witness No. 1 Shakuntla Devi, own sister of the appellant, O.P.

         Witness No 2 Kiran Devi and O.P. Witness No. 3 Ravindra

         Kumar Sharma, neighbours of the appellant, O.P. Witness No. 4

         Bindeshwar Prasad, maternal uncle of the appellant, O.P.
 Patna High Court MA No.81 of 2014 dt.25-09-2020
                                           5/18




         Witness No. 5 Anita Devi, appellant herself, O.P. Witness No. 6

         Tetri Devi, neighbour of the appellant and O.P. Witness No. 7

         Vinay Kumar Yadav, the brother of the appellant wife.

                     The learned Additional Principal Judge, Family Court

         found that on the ground of desertion the marriage could not be

         dissolved as the marriage between the parties was admittedly

         performed on 13.2.2000, initially the matrimonial case for

         judicial separation was filed on 27.4.2001 and subsequently vide

         order dated 5.11.2011 the case was converted into divorce case.

         Hence, it was contrary to the provision under Section 13(1)(i-b)

         of the Act which mandates that the marriage can be dissolved by

         a decree of divorce on the ground that the other party has

         deserted the petitioner for a continuous period of not less than

         two years immediately preceding the presentation of the

         petition. In the present case, admittedly, within one year the case

         for judicial separation was filed which was ultimately converted

         into a divorce case.

                   So far as the question of cruelty is concerned, it has been

         decided by the learned Additional Principal Judge, Family

         Court in favour of the respondent husband on the ground that

         by filing criminal case by the appellant wife he was compelled

         to remain in custody for twenty days and during the proceeding
 Patna High Court MA No.81 of 2014 dt.25-09-2020
                                           6/18




         of the complaint case the complainant wife created nuisance in

         the concerned court and above all, they are residing separately

         since more than twelve years and hence, all these facts suggest

         that the appellant wife has been cruel to the respondent husband.

         The finding recorded in paragraph 19 of the impugned

         judgment is as follows:

                           "In  this case admittedly both the parties are
                           living separately for more than 12 years and
                           admittedly there is no any relationship of
                           husband and wife in between the parties for
                           the last one decade. As per statements of
                           respondent's witnesses, respondent bears
                           good behaviour and peace loving lady, then
                           the question arises why both the parties are
                           living separately for the last several years. In
                           this case the respondent filed a criminal case
                           under 
Section 498(A)
 of the IPC against the
                           petitioner for want of illegal demand of
                           money, but the respondent chased the
                           petitioner to the Hon'ble High Court Patna
                           where the privilege of bail was cancelled
                           because of non-compliance of the order by
                           the petitioner and the petitioner remained in
                           jail for more than 20 days and lastly got the
                           privilege of bail from the Supreme Court.
                           During the course of hearing of Complaint
                           Case No. 2231(C) of 2002 respondent
                           misbehaved with the petitioner and created
                           nuisance in the court as Ext.3 and 4 go to
                           show. Meaning thereby the relationship in
                           between the parties was not cordial and day
                           by day became strained more and more and
                           the respondent did not leave any stone
                           unturned to get the petitioner harassed. These
                           facts itself goes to show that the conduct of
                           the respondent was/is cruel against the
                           petitioner. These conduct of the respondent
                           corroborates the facts placed by the petitioner
 Patna High Court MA No.81 of 2014 dt.25-09-2020
                                           7/18




                           that the respondent abused them in filthy
                           languages and quarrel in family on petty
                           matter and did not allow the petitioner to
                           cohabit with her, whatever the reason may
                           be."



                       Learned counsel for the appellant submits that the

         marriage has been dissolved contrary to the evidence on record.

         No instance of cruelty has been given. The learned Court below

         has failed to consider that there is no claim of physical torture,

         rather it is a mental torture and all the instances which have

         been considered for causing mental cruelty to the respondent

         husband are subsequent to the filing of the matrimonial case.

         The respondent did not take any effort to reconcile the issue.

         Specific case of the appellant wife in written statement is that

         she is ready to resume the conjugal life and the witnesses

         adduced on her behalf, particularly, O.P. Witness No. 4, the

         maternal uncle of the appellant wife and O.P. Witness No. 7, the

         brother of the appellant have deposed that the appellant is still

         ready to resume the conjugal life.

                       It is further submitted by the learned counsel for the

         appellant that the irretrievable breakdown of marriage is not a

         ground of dissolution of marriage under 
Section 13
 of the Act,

         yet the marriage has been considered to be irretrievably broken
 Patna High Court MA No.81 of 2014 dt.25-09-2020
                                           8/18




         down. The respondent was in jail since he failed to comply the

         order of the Court of payment of maintenance amount and

         litigation cost, which he undertook to pay, as a result his bail

         was cancelled and ultimately, he was granted bail by the

         Hon'ble Supreme Court on the condition that the respondent

         husband will pay Rupees One Thousand to the appellant wife

         per month.

                    Learned counsel for the respondent submits that the

         respondent husband was tortured and there is specific instance

         to that effect. The appellant wife misbehaved not only with the

         respondent husband, but also with his parents. The appellant

         used to consume drugs and she never allowed the respondent to

         have physical relationship as she remained at her parents house.

         Hence, the impugned judgment does not need any interference.

                Having heard learned counsels for the parties, this much is

         an admitted position that the marriage was performed between

         the appellant and the respondent on 13.2.2000. The respondent

         husband initially filed Judicial Separation Case No. 20 of 2001

         for grant of judicial separation on 27.4.2001 i.e. within fourteen

         months of the marriage. Subsequently, vide order dated

         5.11.2011
 the said case was converted into a Divorce case on

         filing of the amendment by respondent husband.
 Patna High Court MA No.81 of 2014 dt.25-09-2020

                                           9/18


Section 10
 of the Act deals with the option of judicial

         separation which allows either party to a marriage to present a

         petition praying for a decree for judicial separation on any of

         the grounds specified in sub-section(1) of 
Section 13
 of the Act

         or any one of the grounds specified under sub-section (2)

         thereof. Section 13(1)(i-b) of the Act clearly suggests that on the

         ground of desertion the dissolution of marriage can be claimed

         if the other party has deserted the petitioner for a continuous

         period of not less than two years immediately preceding the

         presentation of the petition. Meaning thereby, the application for

         judicial separation was not maintainable in the present case, in

         view of the embargo under Section 13(1)(i-b) of the Act, hence,

         the learned Court below has rightly rejected the claim of the

         respondent husband for dissolution of marriage on the ground of

         desertion.



                   So far as cruelty is concerned, the cruelty has not been

         defined in the Act. The concept of cruelty and its effect vary

         from individual to individual as has been held in the case of

         Gananath Pattnaik Vs. State of Orissa, reported in (2002) 2 SCC


         619. Paragraph 7 of the judgment reads as follows:


                               "7.   The concept of cruelty and its effect varies
                         from individual to individual, also depending upon
                         the social and economic status to which such
 Patna High Court MA No.81 of 2014 dt.25-09-2020

                                           10/18





                         person belongs. "Cruelty" for the purposes of
                         constituting the offence under the aforesaid section
                         need not be physical. Even mental torture or
                         abnormal behaviour may amount to cruelty and
                         harassment in a given case."



                  Cruelty can be physical and mental both. It is difficult to

         prove mental cruelty by direct evidence as the mental cruelty is

         the state of mind and feeling caused to one side with the

         behaviour and conduct of the other side.



                 In the present case, from perusal of the evidence adduced,

         it appears that the respondent husband has not alleged any

         physical cruelty but only a mental cruelty and to prove the same,

         it is said that the behaviour of the appellant wife was not good

         with the respondent and his parents, the appellant wife used to

         consume certain drugs, but the time and date of such

         misbehaviour has not been mentioned, nor any witness has

         suggested like that. Out of four witnesses, P.Ws 1 and 2 are

         neighbour of the respondent husband who are hear say

         witnesses. In a matrimonial suit the best witnesses are family

         members,         but the only family member apart from the

         respondent husband, is P.W. 4 Anil Kumar, the brother of the

         respondent husband. P.W. 1 and P.W. 4 in their evidence have
 Patna High Court MA No.81 of 2014 dt.25-09-2020

                                           11/18





         stated that the appellant wife remained in the matrimonial house

         only for 22 days. No medical opinion has been brought on

         record to prove that the appellant wife used to consume certain

         drugs. So far the issue of cruelty by filing criminal case under

         
Section 498A
 of the IPC is concerned, that may not be

         considered as cruelty. Moreover, the criminal case was filed

         subsequent to the filing of the matrimonial case for judicial

         separation and the bail of the respondent husband was cancelled

         due to default in complying the order of the Court.


 
It is well settled law that no party can be permitted to

         carve out issues for destroying the institution of marriage on

         frivolous ground. Day to day wear and tear cannot be treated as

         cruelty. So far as mental cruelty is concerned, in the case of

         
Samar Ghosh Vs. Jaya Ghosh
, reported in (2007) 4 SCC 511,

         the legislature has been carved out indicating the instances of

         mental cruelty. Paragraph 101 of the judgment reads as follows:


                       "101. No uniform standard can ever be laid down for
                 guidance, yet we deem it appropriate to enumerate some
                 instances of human behaviour which may be relevant in
                 dealing with the cases of 'mental cruelty'. The instances
                 indicated in the succeeding paragraphs are only
                 illustrative and not exhaustive:



                         (i) On consideration of complete matrimonial life
                         of the parties, acute mental pain, agony and
 Patna High Court MA No.81 of 2014 dt.25-09-2020

                                           12/18





                         suffering as would not make possible for the parties
                         to live with each other could come within the broad
                         parameters of mental cruelty.

                         (ii) On comprehensive appraisal of the entire
                         matrimonial life of the parties, it becomes
                         abundantly clear that situation is such that the
                         wronged party cannot reasonably be asked to put
                         up with such conduct and continue to live with
                         other party.

                         (iii)***

                         (iv) Mental cruelty is a state of mind. The feeling of
                         deep anguish, disappointment, frustration in one
                         spouse caused by the conduct of other for a long
                         time may lead to mental cruelty.

                         (v) A sustained course of abusive and humiliating
                         treatment calculated to torture, discommode or
                         render miserable life of the spouse.

                         (vi) Sustained unjustifiable conduct and behaviour
                         of one spouse actually affecting physical and
                         mental health of the other spouse. The treatment
                         complained of and the resultant danger or
                         apprehension must be very grave, substantial and
                         weighty.

                         (vii)-(ix)***

                         (x) The married life should be reviewed as a whole
                         and a few isolated instances over a period of years
                         will not amount to cruelty. The ill-conduct must be
                         persistent for a fairly lengthy period, where the
                         relationship has deteriorated to an extent that
 Patna High Court MA No.81 of 2014 dt.25-09-2020

                                           13/18





                         because of the acts and behaviour of a spouse, the
                         wronged party finds it extremely difficult to live
                         with the other party any longer, may amount to
                         mental cruelty.

                         (xi)-(xiii)***

                         (xiv) Where there has been a long period of
                         continuous separation, it may fairly be concluded
                         that the matrimonial bond is beyond repair. The
                         marriage becomes a fiction though supported by a
                         legal tie. By refusing to sever that tie, the law in
                         such cases, does not serve the sanctity of marriage;

 
on the contrary, it shows scant regard for the
                         feelings and emotions of the parties. In such like
                         situations, it may lead to mental cruelty."



                     There is nothing on record to suggest that it was

         impossible for the respondent husband to live with the appellant.

         The very limited period of stay of the appellant wife at the

         matrimonial house suggests that it was too early to claim

         judicial separation on the ground of cruelty and desertion. The

         meticulous analysis of the materials on record suggests that the

         present case does not come within the purview of the instances

         enumerated in the case of 
Samar Ghosh
 (supra) with regard to

         mental cruelty.




 
In the case of 
K. Srinivas Rao Vs. D.A. Deepa
, reported
 Patna High Court MA No.81 of 2014 dt.25-09-2020

                                           14/18





         in (2013) 5 SCC 226, certain more grounds have been added as

         instances of mental cruelty, like, making unfounded indecent

         defamatory allegation against the spouse or his or her relatives

         in the pleadings, filing of complaints or issue notices or news

         items which may have adverse impact on the business prospect

         or the job of the spouse and filing repeated false complaints and

         cases in the court against the spouse may amount to mental

         cruelty. Paragraph 16 of the judgment reads as follows:


                                "16.   Thus, to the instances illustrative of
                         mental cruelty noted in Samar Ghosh [(2007) 4
                         SCC 511] , we could add a few more. Making
                         unfounded indecent defamatory allegations against
                         the spouse or his or her relatives in the pleadings,
                         filing of complaints or issuing notices or news
                         items which may have adverse impact on the
                         business prospect or the job of the spouse and filing
                         repeated false complaints and cases in the court
                         against the spouse would, in the facts of a case,
                         amount to causing mental cruelty to the other
                         spouse."



                  The present case also does not come under any of the

         instances of mental cruelty as enumerated in above quoted

         judgments.



                  Hence, in view of this Court, the evidence with regard to
 Patna High Court MA No.81 of 2014 dt.25-09-2020

                                           15/18





         the cruelty has not been appreciated in its true perspective and

         hence the ground of cruelty has not been proved by the evidence

         on record.



 
It is also apt to consider that in the present case,

         matrimonial proceeding got initiated within a little over one

         year of the marriage and delay in disposal of the matrimonial

         case cannot give a rope for dissolving the marriage. However in

         the case of 
K. Srinivas
 (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court

         suggested that the idea of pre-litigation mediation and such

         mediation can be had by resorting to the provision of 
Section 9


         of the Family Courts Act. Paragraph 46.1 of the judgment reads

         as follows:




                                "46.1.   In terms of 
Section 9
 of the Family
                         Courts Act, the Family Courts shall make all efforts
                         to    settle    the      matrimonial   disputes   through
                         mediation. Even if the counsellors submit a failure
                         report, the Family Courts shall, with the consent of
                         the parties, refer the matter to the mediation centre.
                         In such a case, however, the Family Courts shall set
                         a reasonable time-limit for mediation centres to
                         complete the process of mediation because
                         otherwise the resolution of the disputes by the
                         Family Court may get delayed. In a given case, if
                         there is good chance of settlement, the Family
                         Court in its discretion, can always extend the time-
 Patna High Court MA No.81 of 2014 dt.25-09-2020

                                           16/18





                         limit."



 
Section 9
 of the Family Courts Act, 1984 casts the duty

         upon the Family Court to persuade the parties to arrive at a

         settlement in respect of the matrimonial dispute. 
Section 9
 of the

         Family Courts Act reads as follows:-



                                    "In every suit or proceeding,
                         endeavour shall be made by the Family Court in
                         the first instance, where it is possible to do so
                         consistent with the nature and circumstances of
                         the case, to assist and persuade the parties in
                         arriving at a settlement in respect of the subject-
                         matter of the suit or proceeding and for this
                         purpose a Family Court may, subject to any rules
                         made by the High Court, follow such procedure
                         as it may deem fit. -(1) In every suit or
                         proceeding, endeavour shall be made by the
                         Family Court in the first instance, where it is
                         possible to do so consistent with the nature and
                         circumstances of the case, to assist and persuade
                         the parties in arriving at a settlement in respect
                         of the subject-matter of the suit or proceeding
                         and for this purpose a Family Court may, subject
                         to any rules made by the High Court, follow
                         such procedure as it may deem fit."

                                    (2) If, in any suit or proceeding, at any
                         stage, it appears to the Family Court that there is
                         a reasonable possibility of a settlement between
                         the parties, the Family Court may adjourn the
                         proceedings for such period as it think fit to
                         enable attempts to be made to effect such a
                         settlement.

                                    (3) The power conferred by sub-

                         section (2) shall be in addition to, and not in
 Patna High Court MA No.81 of 2014 dt.25-09-2020

                                           17/18





                         derogation of any other power of the Family
                         Court to adjourn the proceedings."



                       From the above provision, it is crystal clear that in

         every suit or proceeding, the Family Court has to take effort at

         the first instance where it is possible to do so consistent with the

         nature and circumstances of the case, and to assist and persuade

         the parties in arriving at a settlement in respect to the

         matrimonial dispute.



 
Section 23(2)
 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 also

         casts a duty upon the Court to bring about reconciliation.

         
Section 23(2)
 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 reads as

         follows:-



                                   "Before proceeding to grant any relief
                         under this Act, it shall be the duty of the Court in
                         the first instance, in every case where it is
                         possible so to do consistently with the nature
                         and circumstances of the case, to make every
                         endeavour to bring about a reconciliation
                         between the parties:

                                   Provided that nothing contained in this
                         sub-section shall apply to any proceeding
                         wherein relief is sought on any of the grounds
                         specified in clause (ii), clause (iii), clause (iv),
                         clause(v), clause(vi) or clause (vii) of sub-
                         section (1) of 
Section 13
."



                  There is nothing on record to suggest that any effort was

         made by the learned Additional Principal Judge, Family Court to
              Patna High Court MA No.81 of 2014 dt.25-09-2020

                                                        18/18





                      get the issue reconciled between the parties before deciding the

                      issue on merits.



                                 In view of the discussions made above, we are of the

                      considered opinion that the marriage has been dissolved

                      contrary to the evidence on record. As a result, the impugned

                      judgment and decree dated 27.7.2013 and 12.8.2013 passed by

                      the learned Additional Principal Judge, Family Court, Patna in

                      Matrimonial Case No. 763 of 2012 is set aside.


                               Accordingly, this Miscellaneous Appeal is allowed. Let

                      the decree be prepared accordingly.





                                              (Dinesh Kumar Singh, J)


                                             ( Prabhat Kumar Singh, J)

anil/-

AFR/NAFR
CAV DATE
Uploading Date
Transmission Date
 

