



[Cites 
16
, Cited by 
20
]




Madhya Pradesh High Court


Mahaveer Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 9 November, 2021


Author: 
Gurpal Singh Ahluwalia


Bench: 
Gurpal Singh Ahluwalia


                              1
        THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
                    M.Cr.C. No.50855/2021
     Mahavir Singh and others Vs. State of M.P. and another

Gwalior, Dated: 09-11-2021

      Shri Anoop Kumar Gupta, Advocate for applicants.

      Shri BPS Chauhan, Public Prosecutor for respondent


no.1/State.



      This application under 
Section 482
 of Cr.P.C. has been filed for

quashing the FIR in Crime No.54/2018 registered at Police Station

Gormi, District Bhind as well as for quashing the further proceedings

in RCT No.290/2018 pending in the Court of JMFC, Mehgaon,

District Bhind.



2.    It appears that the applicants are facing trial for offence under


Section 4
 of Dowry Prohibition Act. The complainant lodged an FIR

on 22/2/2018 alleging that on 16/6/2017 the engagement of his

daughter took place with applicant no.4, but since the complainant

was not in a position to fulfill the dowry demand of the applicants,

therefore, the marriage was cancelled. It was alleged that the

applicant no.4 was in government job and at the time of settlement of

marriage, the applicant had demanded Rs.5,00,000/- in cash as well

as one bullet motorcycle, apart from other household articles and the

complainant had agreed to give the same. The engagement was

solemnized on 16/6/2017 by exchanging rings in the Pavai Mata

Temple. On 26/6/2017 God Bharai rituals were fulfilled and a gold

ring of Rs.15,000/- was given to applicant no.4, whereas the

                               2

        THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH

                    M.Cr.C. No.50855/2021

     Mahavir Singh and others Vs. State of M.P. and another

applicants gave a pair of silver nose ring, Salvar suit as well as

Sarees to his daughter. The complainant had also given an amount of

Rs.51,000/- in cash and Rs.2,100/- alongwith the clothes to the

family members of the applicant at the time of Vidai. Subh Muhurt

for the marriage of the daughter of the applicant was 5/7/2018 and

accordingly, an invitation in the form of Peeli Chitthi was sent to the

applicants on 16/1/2018 through his son, but the applicants did not

accept the Peeli Chitthi and insisted that a swift car, gold ornaments

of 10 tola to the bride as well as an amount of Rs.5,00,000/- be given

in cash. Further, it was said that in case if the complainant is ready to

give the aforesaid articles and money, then he should resend the Peeli

Chitthi, otherwise they would get applicant no.4 married to

somebody else. Since the complainant was not in a position to give a

swift car, cash amount of Rs.5,00,000/- and gold jewelry of 10 tolas,

therefore, the applicants have broken the marriage, as a result, the

complainant and his daughter have been defamed in the society.



3.    Challenging the FIR as well as the criminal prosecution it is

submitted by the counsel for the applicant that although all the

witnesses in their ocular statements have repeated the allegations

made in the FIR, but their ocular statements are contrary to the Peeli

Chitthi which was seized and is a part of the charge-sheet. It is

submitted that from the Peeli Chitthi it is clear that it was not meant

                                 3

          THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH

                      M.Cr.C. No.50855/2021

       Mahavir Singh and others Vs. State of M.P. and another

for the applicant no.4 as well as the daughter of the complainant and

when the ocular statements are not supported by documentary

statements, then the ocular statements should be disbelived and the

charge-sheet should be quashed. In support of his contentions, the

counsel for the applicant has relied upon the judgment passed by the

Supreme Court in the case of Neeharika Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd.



Vs. State of Maharasthra and others reported in SCC OnLine SC


315.


4.      Per contra, the application is vehemently opposed by the

counsel for the State. It is submitted that while exercising the power

under 
Section 482
 of Cr.P.C. High Court cannot appreciate the

evidence and the power can be exercised only when no offence is

made out, even if the entire allegations made against the accused are

accepted in toto.



5.      Heard learned counsel for the partis.



6.      The solitary argument of the applicant is that since the Peeli

Chitthi which has been filed alongwith the charge-sheet does not

relate to the applicant no.4 and the daughter of the complainant,

therefore, the allegations made in the FIR as well as ocular

statements of the witnesses must be disbelieved. The Supreme Court

in the case of      M/s Neeharika Infrastructure (supra) has held as

                              4

       THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH

                   M.Cr.C. No.50855/2021

    Mahavir Singh and others Vs. State of M.P. and another

under:-



      34. While considering the aforesaid issue, law on the
      exercise of powers by the High Court under Section
      482 Cr.P.C. and/or under Article 226 of the Constitution
      of India to quash the FIR/complaint and the parameters
      for exercise of such powers and scope and ambit of the
      power by the High Court under Section 482 Cr.P.C.

      and/or under 
Article 226
 of the Constitution of India are
      required to be referred to as the very parameters which
      are required to be applied while quashing the FIR will
      also be applicable while granting interim
      stay/protection.

      35. The first case on the point which is required to be
      noticed is the decision of this Court in the case of R.P.
      Kapur (supra). While dealing with the inherent powers
      of the High Court under Section 561-A of the earlier
      Code (which is pari materia with Section 482 of the
      Code), it is observed and held that the inherent powers
      of the High Court under Section 561 of the earlier Code
      cannot be exercised in regard to the matters specifically
      covered by the other provisions of the Code; the
      inherent jurisdiction of the High Court can be exercised
      to quash proceedings in a proper case either to prevent
      the abuse of the process of any court or otherwise to
      secure the ends of justice; ordinarily criminal
      proceedings instituted against an accused person must
      be tried under the provisions of the Code, and the High
      Court would be reluctant to interfere with the said
      proceedings at an interlocutory stage. After observing
      this, thereafter this Court then carved out some
      exceptions to the above-stated rule, which are as under:

         "(i) Where it manifestly appears that there is a legal
         bar against the institution or continuance of the
         criminal proceeding in respect of the offence alleged.

         Absence of
         the requisite sanction may, for instance, furnish cases
         under this category.

         (ii) Where the allegations in the first information
         report or the complaint, even if they are taken at their
         face value and accepted in their entirety, do not
         constitute the offence alleged; in such cases no

                          5

   THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH

               M.Cr.C. No.50855/2021

Mahavir Singh and others Vs. State of M.P. and another

    question of appreciating evidence arises; it is a
    matter merely of looking at the complaint or the first
    information report to decide whether the offence
    alleged is disclosed or not.

    (iii) Where the allegations made against the accused
    person do constitute an offence alleged but there is
    either no legal evidence adduced in support of the
    case or the evidence adduced clearly or manifestly
    fails to prove the charge. In dealing with this class of
    cases it is important to bear in mind the distinction
    between a case where there is no legal evidence or
    where there is evidence which is manifestly and
    clearly inconsistent with the accusation made and
    cases where there is legal
    evidence which on its appreciation may or may not
    support the accusation in question. In exercising its
    jurisdiction under Section 561-A the High Court
    would not embark upon an enquiry as to whether the
    evidence in question is reliable or not. That is the
    function of the trial Magistrate, and ordinarily it
    would not be open to any party to invoke the High
    Court's inherent jurisdiction and contend that on a
    reasonable appreciation of the evidence the
    accusation made against the accused would not be
    sustained."

 36. In the case of Kurukshetra University (supra), this
 Court observed and held that inherent powers under
 
Section 482
 Cr.P.C. do not confer an arbitrary
 jurisdiction on the High Court to act according to whim
 or caprice; that statutory power has to be exercised
 sparingly with circumspection and in the rarest of rare
 cases. In the case before this Court, the High Court
 quashed the first information report filed by the
 Kurukshetra University through Warden and that too
 without issuing notice to the University, in exercise of
 inherent powers under 
Section 482
 Cr.P.C. This Court
 noticed and observed that the High Court was not
 justified in quashing the FIR when thepolice had not
 even commenced investigation into the complaint filed
 by the Warden of the University and no proceedings
 were at all pending before any Court in pursuance of
 the FIR.

                          6


   THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH

               M.Cr.C. No.50855/2021

Mahavir Singh and others Vs. State of M.P. and another


 37. Then comes the celebrated decision of this Court in
 the case of Bhajan Lal (supra). In the said decision, this
 Court considered in detail the scope of the High Court
 powers under 
Section 482
 Cr.P.C. and/or 
Article 226
 of
 the Constitution of India to quash the FIR and referred
 to several judicial precedents and held that the High
 Court should not embark upon an inquiry into the
 merits and demerits of the allegations and quash the
 proceedings without allowing the investigating agency
 to complete its task. At the same time, this Court
 identified the following cases in which FIR/complaint
 can be quashed:

    "102.(1) Where the allegations made in the first
    information report or the complaint, even if they are
    taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety
    do not prima facie constitute any offence or make out
    a case against the accused.

    (2) Where the allegations in the first information
    report and other materials, if any, accompanying the
    FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying
    an investigation by police officers under Section
    156(1) of the Code except under an order of a
    Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of
    the Code.

    (3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the
    FIR or complaint and the evidence collected in
    support of the same do not disclose the commission
    of any offence and make out a case against the
    accused.

    (4) Where the allegations in the FIR do not constitute
    a cognizable offence but constitute only a non-

    cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a
    police officer without an order of a Magistrate as
    contemplated under Section 155(2) of the Code.
    (5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or
    complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable
    on the basis of which no prudent person can ever
    reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground
    for proceeding against the accused.

    (6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in
    any of the provisions of the Code or the Act
    concerned (under which a criminal proceeding is

                          7

   THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH

               M.Cr.C. No.50855/2021

Mahavir Singh and others Vs. State of M.P. and another

    instituted) to the institution and continuance of the
    proceedings and/or where there is a specific
    provision in the Code or the Act concerned,
    providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the
    aggrieved party.

    (7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly
    attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding
    is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for
    wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a view
    to spite him due to private and personal grudge."

 38. In the case of Golconda Lingaswamy (supra), after
 considering the decisions of this Court in the cases of
 R.P. Kapur (supra) and Bhajan Lal (supra) and other
 decisions on the exercise of inherent powers by the
 High Court under 
Section 482
 Cr.P.C., in paragraphs 5,
 7 and 8, it is observed and held as under:

 "5. Exercise of power under Section 482 of the Code in
 a case of this nature is the exception and not the rule.
 The section does not confer any new powers on the
 High Court. It only saves the inherent power which the
 Court possessed before the enactment of the Code. It
 envisages three circumstances under which the inherent
 jurisdiction may be exercised, namely : (i) to give effect
 to an order under the Code, (ii) to prevent abuse of the
 process of court, and (iii) to otherwise secure the ends
 of justice. It is neither possible nor desirable to lay
 down any inflexible rule which would govern the
 exercise of inherent jurisdiction. No legislative
 enactment dealing with procedure can provide for all
 cases that may possibly arise. Courts, therefore, have
 inherent powers apart from express provisions of law
 which are necessary for proper discharge of functions
 and duties imposed upon them by law. That is the
 doctrine which finds expression in the section which
 merely recognises and preserves inherent powers of the
 High Courts. All courts, whether civil or criminal,
 possess in the absence of any express provision, as
 inherent in their constitution, all such powers as are
 necessary to do the right and to undo a wrong in course
 of administration of justice on the principle quando lex
 aliquid alique concedit, conceditur et id sine quo res
 ipsa esse non potest (when the law gives a person

                          8

   THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH

               M.Cr.C. No.50855/2021

Mahavir Singh and others Vs. State of M.P. and another

 anything, it gives him that without which it cannot
 exist). While exercising powers under the section, the
 Court does not function as a court of appeal or revision.

 Inherent jurisdiction under the section though wide has
 to be exercised sparingly, carefully and with caution
 and only when such exercise is justified by the tests
 specifically laid down in the section itself. It is to be
 exercised ex debito justitiae to do real and substantial
 justice for the administration of which alone courts
 exist. Authority of the court exists for advancement of
 justice and if any attempt is made to abuse that
 authority so as to produce injustice, the court has power
 to prevent such abuse. It would be an abuse of the
 process of the court to allow any action which would
 result in injustice and prevent promotion of justice. In
 exercise of the powers court would be justified to quash
 any proceeding if it finds that initiation or continuance
 of it amounts to abuse of the process of court or
 quashing of these proceedings would otherwise serve
 the ends of justice. When no offence is disclosed by the
 complaint, the court may examine the question of fact.
 When a complaint is sought to be quashed, it is
 permissible to look into the materials to assess what the
 complainant has alleged and whether any offence is
 made out even if the allegations are accepted in toto.

 7. In dealing with the last category, it is important to
 bear in mind the distinction between a case where there
 is no legal evidence or where there is evidence which is
 clearly inconsistent with the accusations made, and a
 case where there is legal evidence which, on
 appreciation, may or may not support the accusations.
 When exercising jurisdiction under Section 482 of the
 Code, the High Court would not ordinarily embark
 upon an enquiry whether the evidence in question is
 reliable or not or whether on a reasonable appreciation
 of it accusation would not be sustained. That is the
 function of the trial Judge. Judicial process, no doubt
 should not be an instrument of oppression, or, needless
 harassment. Court should be circumspect and judicious
 in exercising discretion and should take all relevant
 facts and circumstances into consideration before
 issuing process, lest it would be an instrument in the
 hands of a private complainant to unleash vendetta to

                          9

   THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH

               M.Cr.C. No.50855/2021

Mahavir Singh and others Vs. State of M.P. and another

 harass any person needlessly. At the same time the
 section is not an instrument handed over to an accused
 to short-circuit a prosecution and bring about its sudden
 death..

 8. As noted above, the powers possessed by the High
 Court under Section 482 of the Code are very wide and
 the very plenitude of the power requires great caution in
 its exercise. Court must be careful to see that its
 decision in exercise of this power is based on sound
 principles. The inherent power should not be exercised
 to stifle a legitimate prosecution. High Court being the
 highest court of a State should normally refrain from
 giving a prima facie decision in a case where the entire
 facts are incomplete and hazy, more so when the
 evidence has not been collected and produced before
 the Court and the issues involved, whether factual or
 legal, are of magnitude and cannot be seen in their true
 perspective without sufficient material. Of course, no
 hard-and-fast rule can be laid down in regard to cases in
 which the High Court will exercise its extraordinary
 jurisdiction of quashing the proceeding at any stage.
 
[See 
Janata Dal v. H.S. Chowdhary
 [(1992) 4 SCC
 305 : 1993 SCC (Cri) 36 : (1992) 4 SCC 305 : AIR
 1993 SC 892] and Raghubir Saran (Dr.) v. State of
 Bihar [AIR 1964 SC 1 : (1964) 1 Cri LJ 1].] It would
 not be proper for the High Court to analyse the case of
 the complainant in the light of all probabilities in order
 to determine whether a conviction would be sustainable
 and on such premises, arrive at a conclusion that the
 proceedings are to be quashed. It would be erroneous to
 assess the material before it and conclude that the
 complaint cannot be proceeded with. In a proceeding
 instituted on complaint, exercise of the inherent powers
 to quash the proceedings is called for only in a case
 where the complaint does not disclose any offence or is
 frivolous, vexatious or oppressive. If the allegations set
 out in the complaint do not constitute the offence of
 which cognisance has been taken by the Magistrate, it is
 open to the High Court to quash the same in exercise of
 the inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code. It is
 not, however, necessary that there should be meticulous
 analysis of the case before the trial to find out whether
 the case would end in conviction or acquittal.
 The

                          10

   THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH

               M.Cr.C. No.50855/2021

Mahavir Singh and others Vs. State of M.P. and another

 complaint/FIR has to be read as a whole. If it appears
 that on consideration of the allegations in the light of
 the statement made on oath of the complainant or
 disclosed in the FIR that the ingredients of the offence
 or offences are disclosed and there is no material to
 show that the complaint/FIR is mala fide, frivolous or
 vexatious, in that event there would be no justification
 for interference by the High Court. When an
 information is lodged at the police station and an
 offence is registered, then the mala fides of the
 informant would be of secondary importance. It is the
 material collected during the investigation and evidence
 led in court which decides the fate of the accused
 person. The allegations of mala fides against the
 informant are of no consequence and cannot by
 themselves be the basis for quashing the proceeding."

 39. In the case of Zandu Pharmaceutical Works Ltd.
 (supra), in paragraph 11, this Court has observed and
 held as under:

 "11. ... the powers possessed by the High Court under
 Section 482 of the Code are very wide and the very
 plenitude of the power requires great caution in its
 exercise. Court must be careful to see that its decision
 in exercise of this power is based on sound principles.
 The inherent power should not be exercised to stifle a
 legitimate prosecution. The High Court being the
 highest court of a State should normally refrain from
 giving a prima facie decision in a case where the entire
 facts are incomplete and hazy, more so when the
 evidence has not been collected and produced before
 the court and the issues involved, whether factual or
 legal, are of magnitude and cannot be seen in their true
 perspective without sufficient material. of course, no
 hard-and-fast rule can be laid down in regard to cases in
 which the High Court will exercise its extraordinary
 jurisdiction of quashing the proceeding at any stage. It
 would not be proper for the High Court to analyse the
 case of the complainant in the light of all probabilities
 in order to determine whether a conviction would be
 sustainable and on such premise arrive at a conclusion
 that the proceedings are to be quashed. It would be
 erroneous to assess the material before it and conclude

                          11

   THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH

               M.Cr.C. No.50855/2021

Mahavir Singh and others Vs. State of M.P. and another

 that the complaint cannot be proceeded with. In a
 proceeding instituted on complaint, exercise of the
 inherent powers to quash the proceedings is called for
 only in a case where the complaint does not disclose
 any offence or is frivolous, vexatious or oppressive. If
 the allegations set out in the complaint do not constitute
 the offence of which cognizance has been taken by the
 Magistrate, it is open to the High Court to quash the
 same in exercise of the inherent powers under Section
 482 of the Code. It is not, however, necessary that there
 should be meticulous analysis of the case before the
 trial to find out whether the case would end in
 conviction or acquittal. The complaint has to be read as
 a whole. If it appears that on consideration of the
 allegations in the light of the statement made on oath of
 the complainant that the ingredients of the offence or
 offences are disclosed and there is no material to show
 that the complaint is mala fide, frivolous or vexatious,
 in that event there would be no justification for
 interference by the High Court. When an information is
 lodged at the police station and an offence is registered,
 then the mala fides of the informant would be of
 secondary importance. It is the material collected
 during the investigation and evidence led in court
 which decides the fate of the accused person. The
 allegations of mala fides against the informant are of no
 consequence and cannot by themselves be the basis for
 quashing the proceedings."

 40. In the case of Sanapareddy Maheedhar Seshagiri
 (supra), in paragraph 31, it is observed and held as
 under:

      "31. A careful reading of the abovenoted judgments
      makes it clear that the High Court should be
      extremely cautious and slow to interfere with the
      investigation and/or trial of criminal cases and
      should not stall the investigation and/or prosecution
      except when it is convinced beyond any manner of
      doubt that FIR does not disclose commission of any
      offence or that the allegations contained in FIR do
      not constitute any cognizable offence or that the
      prosecution is barred by law or the High Court is
      convinced that it is necessary to interfere to prevent

                          12

   THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH

               M.Cr.C. No.50855/2021

Mahavir Singh and others Vs. State of M.P. and another

     abuse of the process of the Court. In dealing with
     such cases, the High Court has to bear in mind that
     judicial intervention at the threshold of the legal
     process initiated against a person accused of
     committing offence is highly detrimental to the
     larger public and societal interest. The people and
     the society have a legitimate expectation that those
     committing offences either against an individual or
     the society are expeditiously brought to trial and, if
     found guilty, adequately punished. Therefore, while
     deciding a petition filed for quashing FIR or
     complaint or restraining the competent authority
     from investigating the allegations contained in FIR
     or complaint or for stalling the trial of the case, the
     High Court should be extremely careful and
     circumspect. If the allegations contained in FIR or
     complaint disclose commission of some crime, then
     the High Court must keep its hands off and allow
     the investigating agency to complete the
     investigation without any fetter and also refrain
     from passing order which may impede the trial. The
     High Court should not go into the merits and
     demerits of the allegations simply because the
     petitioner alleges malus animus against the author
     of FIR or the complainant. The High Court must
     also refrain from making imaginary journey in the
     realm of possible harassment which may be caused
     to the petitioner on account of investigation of FIR
     or complaint. Such a course will result in
     miscarriage of justice and would encourage those
     accused of committing crimes to repeat the same.
     However, if the High Court is satisfied that the
     complaint does not disclose commission of any
     offence or prosecution is barred by limitation or that
     the proceedings of criminal case would result in
     failure of justice, then it may exercise inherent
     power under 
Section 482
 CrPC."

 41. In the case of Arun Gulab Gawali (supra), this
 Court set aside the order passed by the High Court
 quashing the criminal complaint/FIR which was even
 filed by the complainant. In the case before this Court,
 prayer for quashing the FIR before the High Court was

                          13

   THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH

               M.Cr.C. No.50855/2021

Mahavir Singh and others Vs. State of M.P. and another

 by the complainant himself and the High Court quashed
 the FIR/complaint in exercise of the powers under
 
Section 482
 Cr.P.C. Quashing and setting aside the
 judgment and order passed by the High Court quashing
 the FIR, this Court in paragraphs 13 and 27 to 29 has
 observed as under:

 
"13. The power of quashing criminal proceedings
     has to be exercised very sparingly and with
     circumspection and that too in the rarest of rare
     cases and the Court cannot be justified in
     embarking upon an enquiry as to the reliability or
     genuineness or otherwise of allegations made in the
     FIR/complaint, unless the allegations are so patently
     absurd and inherently improbable so that no prudent
     person can ever reach such a conclusion. The
     extraordinary and inherent powers of the Court do
     not confer an arbitrary jurisdiction on the Court to
     act according to its whims or caprice. However, the
     Court, under its inherent powers, can neither
     intervene at an uncalled for stage nor can it "soft-
     pedal the course of justice" at a crucial stage of
     investigation/proceedings. The provisions of
     
Articles 226
, 227
 of the Constitution of India and
     
Section 482
 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
     1973 (hereinafter called as "
CrPC
") are a device to
     advance justice and not to frustrate it. The power of
     judicial review is discretionary, however, it must be
     exercised to prevent the miscarriage of justice and
     for correcting some grave errors and to ensure that
     stream of administration of justice remains clean
     and pure. However, there are no limits of power of
     the Court, but the more the power, the more due
     care and caution is to be exercised in invoking these
     powers. (
Vide State of W.B. v. Swapan Kumar Guha

     [(1982) 1 SCC 561 : 1982 SCC (Cri) 283 : (1982) 1
     SCC 561 : 
AIR 1982 SC 949], Pepsi Foods Ltd. v.
     Special Judicial Magistrate
 [(1998) 5 SCC 749 :


     1998 SCC (Cri) 1400], G. Sagar Suri v. State of
     U.P. [(2000) 2 SCC 636 : 2000 SCC (Cri) 513 :
     (2000) 2 SCC 636 : AIR 2000 SC 754] and Ajay
     Mitra v. State of M.P. [(2003) 3 SCC 11 : 2003 SCC
     (Cri) 703]) xxx xxx xxx

     27. The High Court proceeded on the perception

                          14

   THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH

               M.Cr.C. No.50855/2021

Mahavir Singh and others Vs. State of M.P. and another

    that as the complainant himself was not supporting
    the complaint, he would not support the case of the
    prosecution and there would be no chance of
    conviction, thus the trial itself would be a futile
    exercise. Quashing of FIR/complaint on such a
    ground cannot be held to be justified in law.

    Ordinarily, the Court of Session is empowered to
    discharge an accused under 
Section 227
 CrPC even
    before initiating the trial. The accused can,
    therefore, move the trial court itself for such a relief
    and the trial court would be in a better position to
    analyse and pass an order as it is possessed of all
    the powers and the material to do so. It is, therefore,
    not necessary to invoke the jurisdiction under
    
Section 482
 CrPC for the quashing of a prosecution
    in such a case. The reliance on affidavits by the
    High Court would be a weak, hazy and unreliable
    source for adjudication on the fate of a trial. The
    presumption that an accused would never be
    convicted on the material available is too risky a
    proposition to be accepted readily, particularly in
    heinous offences like extortion.

    28. A claim founded on a denial by the complainant
    even before the trial commences coupled with an
    allegation that the police had compelled the lodging
    of a false FIR, is a matter which requires further
    investigation as the charge is levelled against the
    police. If the prosecution is quashed, then neither
    the trial court nor the investigating agency has any
    opportunity to go into this question, which may
    require consideration. The State is the prosecutor
    and all prosecution is the social and legal
    responsibility of the State. An offence committed is
    a crime against society and not against the victim
    alone. The victim under undue pressure or influence
    of the accused or under any threat or compulsion
    may resile back but that would not absolve the State
    from bringing the accused to book, who has
    committed an offence and has violated the law of
    the land.

    29. Thus, while exercising such power the Court has
    to act cautiously before proceeding to quash a
    prosecution in respect of an offence which hits and

                          15

   THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH

               M.Cr.C. No.50855/2021

Mahavir Singh and others Vs. State of M.P. and another

     affects the society at large. It should be a case where
     no other view is possible nor any investigation or
     inquiry is further required. There cannot be a
     general proposition of law, so as to fit in as a
     straitjacket formula for the exercise of such power.
     Each case will have to be judged on its own merit
     and the facts warranting exercise of such power.
     More so, it was not a case of civil nature where
     there could be a possibility of compromise or
     involving an offence which may be compoundable
     under 
Section 320
 CrPC, where the Court could
     apply the ratio of Madhavrao Jiwajirao Scindia
     [(1988) 1 SCC 692 : 1988 SCC (Cri) 234 : (1988) 1
     SCC 692 : AIR 1988 SC 709]."

 42. Thereafter in catena of decisions, this Court has
 reiterated the parameters for exercise of inherent
 powers under 
Section 482
 Cr.P.C. and/or under 
Article
 226
 of the Constitution of India in the matter of
 quashing the FIR/complaint.

 51. 
In the case of 
Ujjal Kumar Burdhan
 (supra), it is
 observed and held by this Court that unless case of
 gross abuse of power is made out against those in
 charge of investigation, the High Court should be loath
 to interfere at early/premature stage of investigation.


 52. 
In the case of 
Satvinder Kaur v. State (Govt. of NCT
 of Delhi
), (1999) 8 SCC 728, in paragraphs 14 to 16, it
 is observed and held as under:


 
"14. Further, the legal position is well settled that if
      an offence is disclosed the court will not normally
      interfere with an investigation into the case and will
      permit investigation into the offence alleged to be
      completed. If the FIR, prima facie, discloses the
      commission of an offence, the court does not
      normally stop the investigation, for, to do so would
      be to trench upon the lawful power of the police to
      investigate into cognizable offences. [
State of W.B.
      v. Swapan Kumar Guha
, (1982) 1 SCC 561 : 1982
      SCC (Cri) 283] It is also settled by a long course of
      decisions of this Court that for the purpose of
      exercising its power under 
Section 482
 CrPC to
      quash an FIR or a complaint, the High Court would
      have to proceed entirely on the basis of the

                          16

   THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH

               M.Cr.C. No.50855/2021

Mahavir Singh and others Vs. State of M.P. and another

    allegations made in the complaint or the documents
    accompanying the same per se; it has no jurisdiction
    to examine the correctness or otherwise of the
    allegations.
 
[
Pratibha Rani v. Suraj Kumar
, (1985)
    2 SCC 370, 395 : 1985 SCC (Cri) 180]


    15. Hence, in the present case, the High Court
    committed a grave error in accepting the contention
    of the respondent that the investigating officer had
    no jurisdiction to investigate the matters on the
    alleged ground that no part of the offence was
    committed within the territorial jurisdiction of the
    police station at Delhi. The appreciation of the
    evidence is the function of the courts when seized
    of the matter. At the stage of investigation, the
    material collected by an investigating officer cannot
    be judicially scrutinized for arriving at a conclusion
    that the police station officer of a particular police
    station would not have territorial jurisdiction. In
    any case, it has to be stated that in view of 
Section
    178(c)
 of the Criminal Procedure Code, when it is
    uncertain in which of the several local areas an
    offence was committed, or where it consists of
    several acts done in different local areas, the said
    offence can be enquired into or tried by a court
    having jurisdiction over any of such local areas.
    Therefore, to say at the stage of investigation that
    the SHO, Police Station Paschim Vihar, New Delhi
    was not having territorial jurisdiction, is on the face
    of it, illegal and erroneous. That apart, Section
    156(2) contains an embargo that no proceeding of a
    police officer shall be challenged on the ground that
    he has no territorial power to investigate. The High
    Court has completely overlooked the said embargo
    when it entertained the petition of Respondent 2 on
    the ground of want of territorial jurisdiction.

 
16. Lastly, it is required to be reiterated that while
    exercising the jurisdiction under 
Section 482
 of the
    Criminal Procedure Code of quashing an
    investigation, the court should bear in mind what
    has been observed in the 
State of Kerala v. O.C.
    Kuttan
 [(1999) 2 SCC 651 : 1999 SCC (Cri) 304 :


    JT (1999) 1 SC 486] to the following effect : (SCC
    pp. 654-55, para 6) "Having said so, the Court gave

                               17

        THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH

                    M.Cr.C. No.50855/2021

     Mahavir Singh and others Vs. State of M.P. and another

          a note of caution to the effect that the power of
          quashing the criminal proceedings should be
          exercised very sparingly with circumspection and
          that too in the rarest of rare cases; that the court will
          not be justified in embarking upon an enquiry as to
          the reliability or genuineness or otherwise of the
          allegations made in the FIR or the complaint and
          that the extraordinary or inherent powers do not
          confer an arbitrary jurisdiction on the court to act
          according to its whim or caprice. It is too well
          settled that the first information report is only an
          initiation to move the machinery and to investigate
          into a cognizable offence and, therefore, while
          exercising the power and deciding
          whether the investigation itself should be quashed,
          utmost care should be taken by the court and at that
          stage, it is not possible for the court to sift the
          materials or to weigh the materials and then come to
          the conclusion one way or the other. 
In the case of
          
State of U.P. v. O.P. Sharma
 [(1996) 7 SCC 705 :
          1996 SCC (Cri) 497 : JT (1996) 2 SC 488] a three-
          Judge Bench of this Court indicated that the High
          Court should be loath to interfere at the threshold to
          thwart the prosecution exercising its inherent power
          under Section 482 or under 
Articles 226
 and 
227
 of
          the Constitution of India, as the case may be, and
          allow the law to take its own course.
 
The same view
          was reiterated by yet another three-Judge Bench of
          this Court in the case of 
Rashmi Kumar v. Mahesh
          Kumar Bhada
 [(1997) 2 SCC 397 : 1997 SCC (Cri)
          415 : JT (1996) 11 SC 175] where this Court
          sounded a word of caution and stated that such
          power should be sparingly and cautiously exercised
          only when the court is of the opinion that otherwise
          there will be gross miscarriage of justice. The Court
          had also observed that social stability and order is
          required to be regulated by proceeding against the
          offender as it is an offence against society as a
          whole."




7.    Thus, it is clear that this Court while exercising power under


Section 482
 of Cr.P.C. cannot look into the reliability and credibility

                                   18

            THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH

                        M.Cr.C. No.50855/2021

         Mahavir Singh and others Vs. State of M.P. and another

    of the evidence relied upon by the prosecution.



    8.    In the present case, it is not the case of the applicants that they

    were ready to marry the daughter of the complainant. The only

    contention of the counsel for the applicants is that since the Peeli

    Chitthi was not meant for the applicant no.4 and the daughter of the

    complainant, therefore, the allegations of breaking the marriage on

    account of additional demand cannot be relied upon, is beyond the

    scope of power under 
Section 482
 of Cr.P.C. Whether the ocular

    statement is to be believed or the Peeli Chitthi is to be believed or

    discarded, is a matter which is to be considered and decided by the

    Trial Court after recording the evidence.



    9.    As the allegations made in the FIR make out a prima facie case

    warranting prosecution of the applicants, accordingly, the application

    under 
Section 482
 of Cr.P.C. for quashing the FIR in Crime

    No.54/2018 registered at Police Station Gormi, District Bhind as well

    as for quashing the further proceedings in RCT No.290/2018 pending

    in the Court of JMFC, Mehgaon, District Bhind fails and is hereby

    dismissed.



                                                           (G.S. Ahluwalia)
                                                                Judge
Arun*
                             ARUN KUMAR MISHRA
                             2021.11.10 18:29:24 +05'30'
 

