



[Cites 
5
, Cited by 
2
]




Madhya Pradesh High Court


Mahendra Singh @ Bablu vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 December, 2019


Author: 
Sheel Nagu


Bench: 
Sheel Nagu


                                  1             M.Cr.C. No.43060/19

        THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
                 M.Cr.C. No.43060/2019
               (Mahendra Singh @ Bablu Vs. State of M.P.)
Gwalior, Dated : 03/12/2019
      Shri Sushil Goswami, learned counsel for the petitioner.
      Shri R.S. Bansal, learned Public Prosecutor for the State.
      Shri Anshu Gupta, learned counsel for complainant.

      Case diary is perused.

      Learned counsel for the rival parties are heard.

      This is first bail application
 u/S. 438
 Cr.P.C. filed by the

petitioner for grant of anticipatory bail.

      Petitioner apprehends arrest in connection with offences

punishable u/Ss. 304B, 34 of 
IPC
 & u/
S.3
/
4
 of Dowry Prohibition Act

registered as Crime No.164/2019 at Police Station Gyaraspur, District

Vidisha (M.P.).

      Learned Public Prosecutor for the State opposed the application

and prayed for its rejection by contending that on the basis of the

allegations and the material available on record, no case for grant of

Anticipatory bail is made out.

      Dowry death is alleged against the petitioner where the

deceased died due to consumption of poisonous substance on

24/07/2019 within a month of marriage which took place on

24/06/2019. Petitioner is brother-in-law (Jeth) of the deceased.

      The statement of brother of the deceased recorded
 u/S.161


Cr.P.C. Reveals that there were allegations of dowry demand against

all the accused including the petitioner but the specific allegations of
                                  2                 M.Cr.C. No.43060/19

dowry demand related cruelty inflicted soon before death is reflected

from the SMS sent on 23/07/2019 by the deceased to her brother that

mother-in-law (Guddi Bai), sister-in-law (Rani) & Husband

(Gajendra) are inflicting physical cruelty upon the deceased. Name of

the petitioner is not inflicted in the said SMS.

       In view of above and considering the fact that the applicant has

no criminal antecedents and that the material placed on record does

not disclose the possibility of petitioner fleeing from justice, this

Court is though inclined to extend the benefit of bail to the petitioner

but with certain stringent conditions in view of pending investigation.

      Accordingly, without expressing any opinion on merits of the

case, I deem it appropriate to allow this application
 u/S 438
 Cr.P.C in

the following terms.

      It is hereby directed that in the event of arrest, the petitioner

shall be released on bail on furnishing a personal bond of Rs.50,000/-

(Rupees Fifty Thousand only) with two solvent sureties, each of

Rs.25,000/- to the satisfaction of Arresting Authority.

      This order will remain operative subject to compliance of the

following conditions by the petitioner :-

      1.
 The petitioner will comply with all the terms and conditions
         of the bond executed by him;



      2. The petitioner will cooperate in the investigation/trial, as the
         case may be;



      3. The petitioner will not indulge himself in extending
         inducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted with
         the facts of the case so as to dissuade him/her from
         disclosing such facts to the Court or to the Police Officer, as

                                  3               M.Cr.C. No.43060/19


         the case may be;



      4. The petitioner shall not commit and offence similar to the
         offence of which he is accused;



      5. The petitioner will not seek unnecessary adjournments
         during the trial; and


      6. The petitioner will not leave India without previous
         permission of the trial Court/Investigating Officer, as the
         case may be.



      7. The petitioner shall mark his appearance before the
         concerned Police Station once in a week till conclusion of
         investigation.



      8. The petitioner shall plant 25 saplings of indigenous fruit
         bearing or shady trees on the side of the road/street of the
         place of residence of petitioner or at any other place in the
         district which is earmarked by the Collector/Revenue
         Authority for planting trees and shall take care of the trees
         for the next one year by watering the plants and by
         installing tree guards at her own expenses. In case the
         petitioner is unable to afford incurring of such expenses,
         then he would obtain saplings/tree guard from the forest
         authorities (the concerned Forest Range Officer of the area)
         free of cost or at concessional/nominal rates available under
         any beneficial scheme of the Government. The petitioner
         shall file an affidavit disclosing compliance of this
         condition within 30 days in the Registry, failing which this
         court may consider cancellation of bail.


      9. On complying with condition No.8 aforesaid, the petitioner
         is directed to inform the location of plantation made to the
         Forest Range Officer of the area concerned who will pass on
         this information to the DFO concerned.

      For effective implementation of this order in the interest of

betterment of ecology of the area concerned, the District Magistrate

of district within which the petitioner resides is directed to assist the

petitioner/accused to comply with condition No.8 by extending all

possible financial and material assistance to the petitioner admissible

under any of the beneficial scheme for afforestation of the State.

                                                       4              M.Cr.C. No.43060/19


                            The DFO of the concerned District is directed to file

              verification report before the trial court concerned after carrying out

              inspection personally or through any other officer of the Forest

              Department duly authorized in that behalf, disclosing as to whether

              petitioner has complied with condition No.8 or not, and if yes to what

              extent

                            The learned trial Judge on receiving report of non compliance

              of condition No.8 shall forthwith communicate the same to Registry

              of this Court.



                            The Registry on receiving any such report from the trial Court

              disclosing default shall put up the matter before appropriate bench in

              shape of PUD.



                            A copy of this order be sent to the Court concerned for

              compliance.



                            Let a typed copy of this order be also supplied to the counsel

              for the State for compliance of the aforesaid directives.


                            A copy of this order be furnished by the Registry of this court

              to the concerned District Magistrate and the DFO having territorial

              jurisdiction over the place of residence of the petitioner for execution

              of the order in the interest of the ecology.


                            For the time being this case stands disposed of.

                            C.c. as per rules.



                                                                        (Sheel Nagu)
                                                                           Judge
suneel



         SUNEEL DUBEY
         2019.12.04
         14:41:47 +05'30'
 

