



[Cites 
24
, Cited by 
0
]




Delhi District Court


State vs Bhagat Singh Sharma Etc. on 31 August, 2012


    IN THE COURT OF SH.SURESH CHAND RAJAN
 ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE/SPECIAL JUDGE(NDPS)
          DWARKA COURTS, NEW DELHI

SC No.12/1/10
FIR No.121/08
U/s 498A/304B/302/34 
IPC

PS Palam Village

State 

Vs.

1. Bhagat Singh Sharma S/o Late Sh.Gyan Chand    
2. Bijender Sharma @ Birju S/o Sh. Late Sh. Gyan Chand
3. Beena W/o Sh. Late Sh. Gyan Chand
4. Jeetin W/o Sh. Arvind Jangid
                                     ........ Accused

Challan filed on : 07.03.2009
Reserved for Order on : 29.08.2012
Date of Pronouncement : 31.08.2012

JUDGMENT

      Briefly  stated the facts of the prosecution case are that 

on 10.12.08 DD no.4 was recorded in PS Palam Village at about 

2.40 a.m regarding admission of Smt. Sucheta w/o Bhagat Singh 

has been admitted in   DDU   hospital after fall from the roof and 

after   examination   doctor   has   declared   her   brought   dead   and   on 

receipt of this DD, ASI Rajender Singh reached in DDU Hospital 

where he came to know that deceased Sucheta@ Jyoti was married 

on   18.05.2008.   The   dead   body   was   preserved   and   Executive 


State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 1 of 75

 Magistrate   Sh   Surender   Singh   was   informed   who   asked   to   give 

information to the parents of deceased. The parents of the deceased 

were informed and Executive Magistrate reached at the spot and 

inspected the spot. Mobile Crime team was summoned alongwith 

photographer   and   photographs   were   taken.   Exhibits   lying   at   the 

spot   i.e.   blood   stained   cement,   broken   glass   pieces   and   blood 

stained   peticoat   were  seized. The  exhibits  were deposited in  the 

malkhana. On 11.12.2008 the statements of Smt. Sushila mother of 

deceased and Sh Satbir Singh father of deceased were recorded. In 

her   statement   Smt.   Sushila   has   alleged   that   she   is   mother   of 

Sucheta@ Jyoti and she solemnized the marriage of her daughter 

with   Bhagat   Singh   on   18.05.08   according   to   Hindu   Rites   and 

Customs. Before 6 months of   marriage, her daughter was taken 

away by Bhagat Singh. He was arrested after one month and he also 

remained in jail. Thereafter they solemnized the marriage due to 

force of relatives(biradaari). After one month of marriage she gave 

Rs.1.00 lac to her daughter and Rs.50,000/­ was given after taking 

from her father. Her daughter had told that articles for shop has to 

be purchased. After about 2 or two and half month, the boy asked 

her daughter that there are two vehicles in their house and asked 

that one motorcycle be given to him. Thereafter they gave him one 

scooter   which   was   belonging   to   someone   known   for   use.   It   is 

further   the   case   of   the   prosecution   that   mother   in   law   of   her 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 2 of 75

 daughter told her that Jeeten  (her Nanad) has been bless with a son 

and asked her to bring some money for ceremonies. She gave Rs.

12,000/­ on this demand. On 6.12.08 her daughter had come to their 

house and told that they are under debt of Rs.1.00 - 1.25 lac  and if 

helped, they will be debt free. Thereafter on Tuesday this incident 

had taken place. She has further alleged that whenever she had a 

talk with her daughter she used to say that Jiten (nanad) used to 

harass her. She suspects that her daughter has been murdered for 

which   the   responsibility   lies   on   her  damad  Bhagat   Singh,   her 

mother in law, devar and Nanad. They had killed her for dowry. 

Legal action be taken against them. On this statement Ex.PW2/D , 

Executive Magistrate made endorsement to take action as per Law. 

The case vide FIR no. 121/08 was registered. 





2.              It is further the case of the prosecution that site plan was 

prepared by the IO, marriage card and photographs were seized and 

statement of bank showing withdrawl of money from the bank was 

also seized. The accused persons were arrested. Bhagat Singh was 

found sustaining injury on his right hand, his blood sample was got 

preserved. Disclosure statement of Bhagat Singh was recorded and 

he got  recovered his  blood stained clothes i.e. pant and baniyan 

worn by him at the time of incident. Post mortem on the dead body 

was   got   conducted.   Broken   glass   pieces   on   the   dressing   table 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 3 of 75

 supports the scuffle in the room. The dowry articles were seized. 

Exhibits were sent to FSL. After completion of the investigation 

challan was filed in the court for judicial verdict. 


3.              This   case   being   triable   by   the   court   of   session,   after 

committal   proceedings,   it   was   committed   by   the   Ld.MM   and 

received by the court of sessions on 23.03.09.





4.              The   charge   against   accused   Bhagat   Singih   Sharma, 

Bijender Sharma, Smt. Beena has been framed
 u/s 498A
/
304B
/
34
 

IPC and accused Smt. Jeetin has been charged
 u/s 498A
/
34
 IPC 

only  on 05.08.2010 by my Ld. Predecessor Ms. Ravider Kaur, Ld. 

ASJ to which accused persons pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. 

Thereafter, on an application moved on behalf of the State, alternate 

charge   u/s   302/34   
IPC
   was   framed   on   09.08.12   to   which   the 

accused persons pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. 




5.              The   prosecution   in   all   has   examined   as   many   as   23 

witnesses.





6.              The evidence against the accused persons were put to 

them   in   their  statements  recorded  u/s 313  
Cr.P.C
  in  which  they 

have   pleaded   their   innocence   and   deposed   that   they     have   been 

falsely implicated in this case. Accused Bhagat Singh has stated 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 4 of 75

 that he has been   falsely implicated by the parents of his wife as 

they were against the marriage with they were forced to do due to 

intervention of respectables of the society. Sucheta was also willing 

to marry him due to which reason, she had deposed in his favour in 

the   court   during   the   evidence   recorded   in   FIR   no.913/07   of   PS 

Dwarka. On the night of the incident, after they came back from 

attending a marriage in their friend circle, Sucheta had gone to the 

roof of their house to pick up the dry clothes and she had fallen 

from the roof accidentally. On hearing the cries of Suchita, Ravi 

Jain   from   Jain   Sweets   came   and   then   he   informed   them   that 

Sucheta had fallen from the roof which he had seen. Thereafter, he 

told that he is taking her to the hospital and requested him to inform 

her parents. On that night only his mother and he were present in 

the house. Accused Bijender Sharma has taken the plea that he was 

not present at his house on that night and had gone to the house of 

his grandfather at village Palam. Accused Jeetin has stated that after 

attending marriage she went to her matrimonial house alongwith 

her cousin. She does not know what happened thereafter. Later on 

she came to know that her bhabi Sucheta had gone to the roof to 

pick up the clothes and she had fallen from the roof accidentally. 

The accused persons also led evidence in their favour and examined 

DW1 Smt. Kanti Sharma and DW2 Smt. Rajrani.   Thereafter the 

case was fixed for final arguments.



State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 5 of 75


 7.              I have heard the Ld.counsel for the accused persons  as 

well as Ld.APP for the State and perused the testimonies of all the 

PWS  and exhibited documents carefully.





8.              In view of the arguments advanced by the Ld.APP and 

Ld.counsel on behalf of the accused persons, I have perused the 

testimonies of all the PWS. 





9.              PW1 Lady Ct. Urmila has deposed that on 12.12.08 she 

went to the house of accused Veena alongwith Ct. Surender and 

arrested   her.   She   also   conducted   her   personal   search.   The 

documents relating to the arrest of accused were prepared at the PS. 

She does not remember how many documents were prepared and 

who   prepared   the   same.   She   was   declared   hostile   and   cross 

examined by the Ld. APP for the State wherein she has admitted 

that   Insp.SS   Rathi   was   present  at   the  house  and  he interrogated 

accused Veena and documents relating to arrest were prepared by 

him. She had made statement Ex.PW1/X to the IO. She admitted 

that accused Veena  was  taken to DDU Hospital for her medical 

examination. In reply to court question she has stated that since she 

was not present at the spot as such she did not narrate these facts in 

her chief­examination. 



State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 6 of 75


 10.             PW2 Dr.Komal Singh has deposed that on 13.12.08 he 

conducted the postmortem on the dead body of Suchetaaged about 

19   years.   In   his   opinion   the   cause   of   death   was   carniocerebral 

injury   subsequent   to  fall  from  the height. Post  mortem  report  is 

Ex.PW2/A. He has also deposed about receiving of inquest papers. 

He also examined Bhagat Singh vide MLC no.24615 Ex.PW9/A for 

expert opinion. He opined all the injuries to be fresh in nature i.e. 

less than the duration of 72 hours  and opined that the said injuries 

could be possible in a scuffle caused by blunt impact or brushing 

over   the   rough   surface.   His   report   is   at   point   A   to   A   on   MLC 

Ex.PW9/A.   He has also given the duration of injury vide report 

Ex.PW2/G.  




11.             PW3 Vipin Adlakha is the Dy.Manager from SBI Delhi 

Cantt   who   produced   the   record   of   account   no.10469779033   of 

Kapil Furniture w.e.f 1.6.08 to 30.6.08. The account statement is 

Ex.PW3/A. 




12.             PW4 ASI Jagdish Singh has deposed that on 10.12.08 SI 

Rajinder made entry no.27A regarding his arrival in case FIR no.

32/08. He has further deposed that he recorded the FIR of this case 

which is Ex.PW4/B and after registration of the FIR he handed over 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 7 of 75

 the copy of FIR to SI Rajinder Singh. 





13.             PW5   Smt.Sushila   is   the   complainant   and   mother   of 

deceased   Suchita.   Her   statement   recorded   by   the   SDM   is 

Ex.PW5/A.   She   handed   over   the   marriage   card   Ex.P1,   11 

photographs of marriage Ex.P2 (colly.), photocopy of list of dowry 

articles   mark   PW5/A1,   photocopy  of   statement   of   account   mark 

PW5/A2 of her husband to the police which were seized vide memo 

Ex.PW5/B. She was declared hostile by the Ld. APP for the State 

on   some   material   points   and   cross   examined   wherein   she   had 

admitted the suggestions put to her by the Ld.APP for the State. 




14.             PW6 Smt. Maya Devi is the grand mother of deceased. 

She has stated that whenever Sucheta met her she told her that she 

was being harassed for want of dowry by her husband, mother in 

law and sister in law. She was declared hostile by the Ld. APP for 

the State on some material points 




15.             PW7 Satbir Singh is the father of deceased Sucheta and 

he has deposed that before marriage his daughter was induced and 

kidnapped by Bhagat Singh and FIR no.913.07 was recorded. Later 

on   his   daughter   was   recovered   from   accused     and   accused   also 

remained in jail. Thereafter due to interventions of the respectables 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 8 of 75

 of the society he got solemnized marriage of Sucheta with accused 

Bhagat Singh. He further deposed about giving of dowry articles to 

his daughter and regarding demand raised by the accused persons 

and stated that she was harassed by her in laws. The copy of bank 

statement   is   Ex.PW7/A.   The   statement   recorded   by   Executive 

Magistrate is Ex.PW7/B. He had handed over the copy of RC of 

scooter no. DL 9SF 4618 Ex.PW7/C. He received the dead body 

vide receipt Ex.PW7/E. He was declared hostile by the Ld. APP for 

the State on some material points. He has stated that form no.29 & 

30 are Ex.PW16/A and B. 




16.             PW8 SI Balram has deposed that he was informed about 

admission of Sucheta in the hospital vide DD no.4A copy of which 

is   Ex.PW8/A.   ASI   Mahavir   was   also   informed   but   investigation 

was handed over to SI Rajender.





17.             PW9 Dr. Yogendra Nath Maurya has deposed that he 

examined patient Bhagat Singh on 13.12.08 patient Bhagat Singh 

was brought to hospital at about 11.35 a.m with alleged history of 

asaault on 10.11.08 vide MLC no.24463 dated 10.11.08. He was 

brought for re­examination and for forensic opinion. The MLC is 

Ex.PW9/A. 



State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 9 of 75


 18.             PW10   Dr.   Dhananjay   Kumar   has   deposed   that   Dr. 

Chanchal Singh had prepared the MLC of Sucheta. The MLC is 

Ex.PW10/A. 




19.             PW11 HC Satish Kumar is the MHCM who has deposed 

that he made entry no.215 Ex.PW11/A, entry no. 222 Ex.PW11/B, 

Entry no. 223 Ex.PW11/C, entry no.227 Ex.PW11/D in register no.


19. He has further deposed that on 13.1.09 five exhibits bearing no. 

S1 to S4 and S6 were deposited vide entry Ex.PW11/A and were 

sent to FSL Rohini through Ct. Karamvir vide RC no.21/21/9 copy 

of   which   is   Ex.PW11/E.   The   receipt   regarding   deposit   is 

Ex.PW11/F.




20.             PW12 Dr.Avnish has appeared for Dr. Rajesh Saha who 

prepared MLC no.24463 of Bhagat Singh   who was brought for 

medical examination on 12.12.08. He has deposed that as per MLC 

there   were   multiple/three   healed   abrasions   over   ulnar   aspect   of 

right hand of reddish violet colour with crusting. There were nine 

other abrasions (healed). The MLC is Ex.PW12/A. These injuries 

were of about one week and it may be from 2 days to 7 days. 




21.             PW13  HC Rajeev has deposed that he reached at the 

spot on 10.12.08 and taken 14 photographs, the negatives of which 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 10 of 75

 are Ex.PW13/1 to Ex.PW13/14 and print photos are Ex.PW13/15 to 


28.




22.             PW14 Ravi Jain has deposed that that wife of Bhagat 

Singh had fallen from the balcony of her matrimonial house. It was 

around 12 midnight, he was present at his shop when he heard some 

sound of the leaves of the tree in front of the house of accused 

Bhagat   Singh   and   when   he   looked   above   he   saw   the   wife   of 

accused falling from the balcony of her house to the ground. He did 

not see any other person from the matrimonial house of deceased 

present   there.   He   knocked   at   the   door   of   the   house   and   at   this 

accused Bhagat Singh and his mother came out of the house. He 

also   called   his   brother.   Some   neighbourers   also   came   out   on 

hearing   noise.   He   alongwith   Bhagat   Singh   etc     removed   her   to 

DDU   Hospital.   He   has   further   deposed   that   when   the   lady   had 

fallen on the ground she was holding some clothes in her hand, the 

same   were   consisting   of   sarees,   pant,   shirt   and   some   such   like 

clothes   which   were   kept   aside   when   they   removed   her   to   his 

vehicle.     He   told   his   brother   to   inform   the   parents   of   wife   of 

accused. He remained in the hospital for about 2/3 hours. He was 

declared hostile by the prosecution and cross examined by the 

Ld.   APP  for   the   State   wherein   he   was   confronted   with   his 



State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 11 of 75

 statement  Ex.PW14/PA  where the facts narrated by him has not 

been mentioned. 





23.             PW15   HC   Ram   Chander   has   deposed   that   on   the 

intervening   night   of   9/10.12.08   Sucheta   was   admitted   in   the 

hospital   in   injured   condition   with   injuries   on   her   head   and   left 

shoulder and elbow. She was declared brought dead  and her dead 

body was sent to mortuary.  





24.             PW16   S.M.   Sehgal   has   deposed   that   he   purchased 

scooter no. DL9SF 4618 of blue colour in the year 1999 and he sold 

the   said   scooter   for   Rs.10,000/­   approx   in   the   month  of   August 

2008 to Satbir. Sale letter was executed. Form 29 & 30 produced by 

PW Satbir Singh which were put to witness. Ld. Defence counsel 

raised objection to these documents but documents form no.29 and 

30 are Ex.PW16/A and B. The RC of the scooter is Ex.PW7/C. The 

scooter is Ex.P3. He was declared hostile by the prosecution and 

cross   examined  wherein   he   has   denied   the   suggestion   that   in 

July/Aug 08 Satbir Singh came and told him that he wanted to give 

2nd hand scooter to his son in law  and further told to inform if any 

2nd  hand scooter for sale is in his knowledge to which he replied 

that he would give his own scooter to him. VOL. Satbir came to 



State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 12 of 75

 him and asked for 2nd  hand scooter as it was urgently needed by 

him.  





25.             PW17 SI Rajender Singh has deposed that on receipt of 

DD no.4A he reached DDU Hospital and found Sucheta brought 

dead   on   MLC   no.24290.   The   death   occurred   within   7   years   of 

marriage,   so   he   informed   the   Executive   Magistrate   Sh   Surender 

Singh.   He   found   parents   of   the   deceased   in   the   hospital   and 

informed   them   that   Executive   Magistrate   would   come   in   the 

morning for interrogation. On 10.12.08 he alongwith Ct. Surender 

went to the spot where Executive Magistrate also reached. The spot 

was inspected by SDM and crime team officials and photographs 

were   taken   and   exhibits   were   lifted   and   seized   vide   memo 

Ex.PW17/A. He has further stated that the parents of Sucheta did 

not give the statements on the same day. On 11.12.08 the case was 

got registered investigation was handed over to Insp.SS Rathi who 

prepared the site plan at his instance. Satbir produced photographs 

of   marriage   and   marriage   card   and   statement   of   Bank   of   India. 

Invitation   card   is   Ex.P1,   photographs   are   Ex.P2,   list   of   dowry 

articles   is   Ex.PW7/C,   statement   of   account   of   Satbir   Singh   is 

Ex.PW7/A.   They   went   in   search   of   accused   person.   Accused 

Bijender Sharma @ Birju was apprehended form the main gate of 

the house and   arrested   vide memo Ex.PW17/C. Accused Bhagat 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 13 of 75

 Singh was arrested vide memo Ex.PW17/B. Accused Beena was 

arrested   vide   memo   Ex.PW17/A.   Personal   search   memos   of 

accused are Ex.PW17/D&E. He has further deposed that there was 

injury mark on the right hand wrist of accused Bhagat Singh. Case 

property   was   deposited   in   the   malkhana.   Accused   Bhagat   Singh 

was interrogated and his disclosure statement was recorded which 

is Ex.PW17/F. Accused had disclosed that his blood stained clothes 

which he was wearing at the time of incident were hanged behind 

the door of the bathroom and some cash and jewellery of Sucheta 

were   also   lying   in   the   house.   Accused   led   the   police   to   the 

bathroom   on   first   floor   of   the   house   and   produced   one   vest   of 

sandoz, one jeans with blood stains which he was wearing at the 

time of removing the deceased to hospital. The clothes were seized 

vide memo Ex.PW17/G.  




26.             PW18 Sh.Naresh Kumar is the witness from FSL who 

examined   the   exhibits   and   given   his   detailed   report   which   is 

Ex.PW18/A. The serological report is Ex.PW18/B. 




27.             PW19   Sh   Surender   Singh   is   the   then   Executive 

Magistrate who recorded the statements of the parents of deceased 

and directed the SHO for registration of the case. He conducted the 

inquest   proceedings   and   found   some   scratch   mark   on   the   left 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 14 of 75

 forearm and 3 cm approx wound on left portion of head. He also 

found excess bleeding from head and mouth. The death report is 

Ex.PW2/F. He recorded the statements of Stabir Singh Ex.PW7/B 

and Sushila Ex.PW5/A. He prepared the brief facts Ex.PW2/C. He 

got the post mortem conducted.





28.             PW20 Insp. S.S.Rathi is the second IO who visited the 

spot   and   prepared   the   site   plan   Ex.pW20/A.   Father   of   deceased 

produced photographs and marriage card which were seized by the 

IO. He also seized the bank statement and list of dowry articles. He 

further deposed about arrest of accused Bhagat Singh, Beena and 

Bijender. He found injury on the right wrist of Bhagat Singh. He 

has   further   stated   that   accused   Bhagat   Singh   on   interrogation 

disclosed that he had  received injury on his right writs on the night 

of   this   incident   after   he   alongwith   his   wife   and   other   family 

members had returned to their house after attending a marriage, at 

the time of quarrel between him and his wife as she had brought 

insufficient dowry and he had asked Sucheta to keep quite and to 

traumatize her, he had hit on the mirror of the dressing table as a 

result of which it was broken and he had received injury on his 

right wrist. He further deposed about arrest and personal search of 

all the accused. All the accused were taken to hospital for medical 

examination and blood sample of Bhagat Singh were taken which 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 15 of 75

 was   seized   vide   memo   Ex.PW20/B.   Accused   was   again 

interrogated   and   his   disclosure   statement   is   Ex.PW17/F.   He   has 

further deposed that the accused got recovered his clothes which 

were seized vide memo Ex.PW17/G. The case property was sent to 

FSL . Post mortem on the dead body was conducted  and exhibits 

were   seized   vide   memo   Ex.PW20/C   which   were   deposited   in 

malkhana. Accused was referred to Forensic medicine for expert 

opinion regarding nature of injury   where Dr. Komal Singh given 

his opinion on MLC Ex.PW9/A. He seized the jewellery items. He 

collected the photographs and crime team report. He sent notice
 u/s 

91
/
160
   to   Chief   Manager,   SBI   for   producing   the   details   of 

statement of account w.e.f 1.6.08 to 30.6.08 in the name of Kapil 

Furniture. He got prepared the scaled site plan  and sent the exhibits 

to FSL. He formally arrested Jatin   and moved an application for 

clarification about time of injury on the person of accused Bhagat 

Singh.   He   seized   the   copy   of   RC   of   scooter   no.   DL   9SF   4618 

Ex.PW7/C from Satbir Singh vide memo Ex.PW7/D. ON 27.2.09 

Dr. Komal Singh had given opinion Ex.PW2/G on his application 

Ex.PW20/G. He placed DD   no.4A, 29A and 27A Ex.PW20/G, H 

and J on record. The scooter is Ex.P3. Jeans and baniyan are Ex.P4 

&   P5.   He   identified   other   household   items   recovered   from   the 

premises of accused. 





State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 16 of 75


 29.             PW21   HC   Karambir   Singh   has   deposed   that   he   had 

taken five pullandas to FSL vide RC  no.21/09 already Ex.PW11/E 

and   after   depositing   the   same   he   handed   over   the   receipt 

Ex.PW11/F to MHCM.  





30.             PW22 ASI Khajan Singh has deposed that he was posted 

as  Incharge  Mobile  Crime  team  and  he reached at   the  spot  and 

inspected the same. He prepared his report Ex.PW22/A. 




31.             PW23   SI   Mahesh   Kumar   is   the   witness   who   had 

prepared the scaled site plan Ex.PW23/A. 




32.             I   have   also   perused   the   evidence   led   by   the   accused 

persons in this case. DW1 Smt. Kanta Sharma has deposed that she 

was   residing   opposite   the   house   of   Bhagat   Singh.   The   wife   of 

Bhagat   Singh   had   died   unnatural   death.   Neighbour   Mr.   Jain 

knocked the door of their house at about 2.30 midnight and they 

came  out  and   found  that  the wife of accused Bhagat Singh was 

lying dead in the middle of the road who fell between the house of 

accused and their house.  They did not come to know as to how she 

was lying there dead.  She had never heard any complaint from her 

against the accused persons. She was on talking terms with Jyoti 

who used to speak a lot with them and used to remain cheerful. On 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 17 of 75

 the day of incident accused Jatin was not present at her house. She 

was married and used to visit her parents house after 5/6 months. 

5/6 months prior to the incident accused Jatin had delivered a male 

child and as such they had not seen her at the house of her parents. 

The deceased had never complained to them that accused persons 

used   to   demand   dowry   from  her  or  were  harassing  her.  Several 

neighbourer had collected at the spot after Mr. Jain had knocked at 

their door. No cloth was lying near the dead body.   

  


33.             DW2 Smt. Rajrani has deposed that accused Bhagat had 

married with Jyoti about 5/6 months before her death. On the night 

of incident there was commotion outside their house and Mr. Jain 

had knocked the house and they came out and they found wife of 

accused Bhagat Singh lying dead in front of the house of accused. 

She had heard that Jyoti had fallen from the roof. She had never 

heard about any dispute between the accused and Jyoti. She used to 

meet Jyoti and she was always found by her to be cheerful. She 

never found her in depressing mood. She never complaint to her 

against her inlaws. She had not seen accused Jatin at her parents 

house. She had delivered a baby about 5/6 months back. 




34.             In the overall analysis of the testimonies of all the PWS, 

it is revealed that PW5 Sushila is the mother, PW6 Maya Devi is 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 18 of 75

 the   dadi,   PW7   Satbir   Singh   is   the   father   of   the   deceased 

Sucheta@Jyoti  and   PW14   Ravi   Jain   is   the   neighbourer/public 

witness,   PW16   S.M.   Sehgal   is   the   witness   who   sold   scooter   to 

Satbir.    These witnesses including PW19, Sh Surender Singh, the 

then SDM are the main star witnesses of the prosecution. PW5,6& 

7     the   near   relatives   of   deceased   Sucheta   @   Jyoti.       Before 

discussing their deposition made in the court and to bring home the 

guilt of the accused persons
 u/s 498A
/
304B
 IPC it is necessary to 

discuss   the   relevant   provisions.   
Section   304B
   relates   to   dowry 

death. The same was introduced in the 
Indian Penal Code
 and it 

reads as under:­


Sec.304 B (1)


            Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily 
            injury   or   occurs   otherwise   than   under   normal   circumstances 
            within seven years  of her marriage and it is shown that soon 
            before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by 
            her husband or any relative of her husband for or in connection 
            with any demands for dowry such death shall be called dowry 
            death   and   such   husband   or   relative   shall   be   deemed   to   have 
            caused her death. 



            For the purpose of this sub section dowry shall have the same 
            meaning as in 
section 2
 of the dowry prohibition Act 1961. 

            'Whoever   commits   dowry   death   shall   be   punished   with 
            imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 7 years but 
            which may extend to imprisonment for life'. 



           And if the ingredients of 
section 304B
 have been completed then 
           the   presumption   u/s   113   B   in   the   Indian   Evidence   Act   is 


State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 19 of 75

            required.




Section 113 B

           Presumption as to dowry death ­ when the question whether a 
           person has  committed  the dowry death  of a woman  and it  is 
           shown   that   soon   before   her   death   such   woman   had   been 
           subjected   by   such   person   to   cruelty   or   harassment   for   or   in 
           connection with any demand for dowry, the court shall presume 
           that such person had caused the dowry death. 



           In a case of dowry death cruelty on part of husband towards his 
           wife by prosecution has to be proved beyond reasonable doubt 
           and   
section   113   B   
of   Evidence   Act   does   not   alter   this 
           requirement of stick proof.

Section 498 A 
IPC reads as under:­

           'Husband or relatives of husband of a woman subjecting her to 
           cruelty   -   Whoever   being   the   husband   or   the   relative   of   the 
           husband or a woman subjects such woman to cruelty shall be 
           punished with imprisonment  for a term  which may extend to 
           three years and shall be liable to fine'. 

                There   is   explanation   for   the   purpose   of   this   section 

cruelty means:­

           (a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature  as is likely to 
           drive the woman to commit suicide  or to cause grave injury or 
           danger to life, limb or health (whether mental or physical ) of 
           the woman or 


           (b) Harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a 
           view to coercing her or any person related to her to meet any 
           unlawful demand for any property or valuable security or is on 
           account of failure by her or any person related to her to meet 
           such demand.





35.             From the conjoint reading of 
section 304B
 of the IPC and 
Sec. 

113B
 of the Indian Evidence Act, it is apparent that a presumption arising 


State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 20 of 75

 thereunder will operate if the prosecution is able to establish the circumstances 

as   set   out   in   
Sec.304B
   of   IPC.   The   ingredients   of   the   aforementioned 

provisions are :­


      1. That the death of the woman caused by any burns or bodily injury or in 
         some circumstances which is not normal;

      2. Such death occurs within 7 years from the date of her marriage

      3. That the victim was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband 
         or any relative of her husband

      4. Such cruelty or harassment should be for or in connection with demand 
         of dowry and 

      5. Such cruelty and harassment was made soon before her death.
 

36.             In the normal circumstances though cruelty at any time 

after marriage may cause depression in the mind of the victim, the 

cruelty and harassment envisaged in section 304B   is to be seen 

before the death of a woman   and it is the duty of the court   to 

scrutinize     the   evidence   carefully   because   cases   are   not   rare   in 

which   occasionally   there   is   demand   and   then   the     atmosphere 

becomes calm and quiet and then again there is demand. Where a 

wife dies in the house of the husband within the short span of seven 

years of her marriage, it is of considerable  difficulty to assess the 

precise   circumstances   in   which   the   incident   occurred   because 

ordinarily independent witnesses are not available   as the torture 

and   harassment   is   confined   within   the   four   walls   of   the   house. 

However, the courts are to be vigilant to scrutinize the evidence 

regarding the harassment and torture carefully if the witnesses are 

relatives  of   the  deceased  and relations  between them and her in 


State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 21 of 75

 laws are strained for any reason whatsoever it might be. 




37.             Urge for living is a natural phenomenon in mankind. A 

person would not embrace death unless there is some psychological 

trouble   or   mental   agony   or   such   circumstances   that   the   person 

committing suicide may think that the life he or she is living is 

more miserable than the pangs and agony of death. The power of 

tolerance would vary from person to person. Some  persons try to 

make the life easy by tolerance while others even on petty points 

bring an end to their life.  





38.          Reverting back to the testimonies of witnesses, firstly I 

would   consider   the   testimonies   of  the   witnesses   adduced   by  the 

prosecution   who   are   related   to   deceased   Sucheta   @Jyoti.   PW1 

Smt. Sushila   who is the mother of deceased and complainant in 

this case has deposed that Sucheta was married to Bhagat Singh on 

18.05.2008. Five/Six months before marriage accused Bhagat Singh 

had   allured   her   daughter   and   took   her   away   and   case   was 

registered.   Thereafter   they   solemnized   the   marriage   with   the 

intervention of members of the society and they had given various 

household articles, gold and Rs.21,000/­. After ¾ days of marriage 

her   daughter   came   to   her   house   and   told   that   her   inlaws   were 

expecting more dowry. She further told that accused Bhagat Singh 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 22 of 75

 asked her to bring Rs.1.00/1.50 lacs so that he could put articles in 

his cycle shop to earn better livelihood. She has further stated that 

after about one month a sum of Rs.1.00 lac was withdrawn from the 

account of her husband which she alongwith her husband had given 

to accused Bhagat Singh at his house. She has further stated that 

after about 2 months, her daughter told her on telephone that her 

sister in law Jatin had come from her matrimonial house and she 

along with her mother in law were harassing her by saying that her 

father was having two vehicles and they could not afford to give a 

scooter to them. Her husband arranged for an old scooter from an 

acquittance of his in office and gave the same to Bhagat Singh after 

two/two and half months of marriage.  After ¾ months of marriage 

deceased came to their house and she was quite disturbed and when 

she insisted she told her that her sister in law had delivered a son 

and that her mother in law, brother in law Birju @ Brij Mohan and 

her husband had been harassing her since morning and told her to 

bring   RS.20,000/­   from   her   parents   for   giving   chhuchak   to   her 

sister in law. At that time they gave Rs.12,000/­ to Jyoti and Bhagat 

Singh who had come to their house in the evening again said the 

said   amount   was   given   to   Bhagat   Singh.   Whenever   Jyoti 

complained, she tried to make Bhagat Singh understand and also 

told him that it was is duty to make her happy. She has further 

stated that on 6.12.08 her daughter came to their house and she was 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 23 of 75

 too much disturbed. On enquiry she told her and her husband that 

her mother in law, husband, sister in law Jitin, brother in law Birju 

had been harassing her since morning and had given her beating to 

bring Rs.1/1.50 lac to pay the debts of Bhagat Singh so that the 

creditors do  not  visit  their house. Deceased further told her that 

Jitin   had   threatened   her   that   she   would   not   be   allowed   to   live 

peacefully till the aforesaid demand is fulfilled. She told that they 

will see to fulfill this demand. She has stated that before 6.12.08 

she alongwith her husband visited the house of accused and told 

that they should not harass their daughter and everything would be 

fine in due course of time. After 6.12.08 when her daughter went 

back, she had no talk with her. On 8.12.08 she had given a call on 

mobile of Bhagat Singh and she told him that he should make her to 

talk to her daughter but he told that he was out of house and when 

he would go back, he would make her talk to her daughter but it did 

not happen nor he made any call.  She also did not make any call to 

him thereafter. On the intervening night of 9/10.12.08 around 2 a.m 

one   Jain   Sweet   maker   who   runs   his   shop   near   the   matrimonial 

house of her daughter came alongwith one person on motorcycle to 

their   house   and   informed   them   that   their   daughter   is   in   serious 

condition   and   he   did   not   disclose   what   had   happened.   She 

alongwith her husband went there and saw  and there was pool of 

blood outside the house. On information regarding their daughter, 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 24 of 75

 they   went   to   DDU   Hospital       and   found   her   in   emergency   on 

stretcher and her hair, face and clothes all were smeared with blood 

and she was lying dead. Bhagat Singh and his mother were present 

there. Bhagat Singh informed them that Jyoti had fallen from roof 

as she had gone to remove clothes. She knew that Jitin had come to 

her parents house two days before for attending the marriage. All 

the   accused   have   killed   her   daughter   for   non   fulfillment   of   the 

demand of dowry made on 6.12.08. her statement is Ex.PW5/A. 

She   handed   over   the   marriage   Card   Ex.P1,   11   photographs   of 

marriage colly. Ex.p2, photocopy of dowry articles mark PW5/A1, 

photocopy of statement of account Mark PW5/A2 of her husband 

which were seized vide memo Ex.PW5/B. She has further stated 

that after 3­4 months of marriage her daughter called up on phone 

and told that her husband and mother in law were beating her for 

demand of money. She had spoken to Bhagat Singh and made him 

understand   to  live  peacefully and told 'hum  bhi  jaise hoga kuch 

karenge' and everything would be alright with the passage of time. 

She was declared hostile by the prosecution and cross examined 

by the Ld. APP for the State on some material points wherein she 

has admitted the suggestions put by the Ld. APP for the State that 

her daughter told her that she was being harassed and tortured by 

her in laws and husband for demand of money from her to buy 



State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 25 of 75

 vehicle   to   ply   the   same   on   hire   basis,   all   were   pressurizing   for 

vehicle and mother in law and brother in law were saying jab gadi 

dila   doge   tabhi   Jyoti   ko   chain   se   rehne   denge".  In   Cross 

examination  she   has   stated   that   accused   Bhagat   Singh   was 

acquitted in case FIR no.913/07 as her daughter deposed that she 

had gone and married with accused of her fee will and wanted to 

live with her husband and does not want to go with her parents. She 

admitted   that   at   the   time   when   her   daughter   had   eloped   with 

accused,  she and her husband were against their relationship. She 

was never    told by her daughter that she had married with accused 

Bhagat after she had eloped. She had inquired from her daughter if 

she was happy with this marriage at that time of discussion of her 

marriage with accused Bhagat to which she replied in affirmative. 

On   her   return   her   daughter   told   her   that   she   would   marry   only 

Bhagat   Singh   and   nobody   else.   She   admitted   that   there   was   no 

demand   of   dowry   from   accused   or   his   family   at   the   time   of 

settlement   of   marriage.   She   does   not   know   if   her   daughter   had 

stated in the court in her statement recorded in case FIR no.913/07 

after 18.5.08 when she was got married with accused Bhagat that 

she was living happily with accused Bhagat Singh. About 200­250 

persons from both the sides attended the marriage. AT the time of 

marriage they had voluntarily given gifts to her and there was no 



State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 26 of 75

 demand of dowry by the accused persons at that time. At the time 

of marriage her mother in was living in the house of her brother in 

law near her house vol. On the day of marriage of her daughter she 

was   in   their   house   and   she   also   used   to   live   in   village   and 

sometimes   she   used   to   come   to  stay   with  them   in   Delhi   and   at 

present   also   she   is   in   village.   She   cannot   admit   or   deny   if   her 

daughter   visited   their   house   after   15   or   20   days   of   perphera 

ceremony. She cannot tell if after the marriage of her daughter Jyoti 

(since deceased) till 31.5.08 when the order of acquittal in case FIR 

no. 913/07 was passed by the court besides perphera ceremony her 

daughter had visited their house or not. Vol. On the day when her 

statement was recorded she had come from the house of accused 

persons and they had also accompanied them. She denied that her 

statement as well as statement of her husband was recorded and 

they had stated that Jyoti was living happily with accused Bhagat 

Singh after their marriage. She has further stated that  her husband 

had   handed   over  Rs.2,00,000/­  to  her   after  withdrawal   from   the 

bank, however, she is not aware about the exact amount withdrawn 

by him from the bank on that day. Her statement was recorded by 

the police in her house in the night of between 9 p.m to 11.00 p.m 

perhaps on the intervening night of 10/12/08 and 11/12/08. In her 

presence   statement   of   other   witnesses   were   not   recorded   at   her 

house. Her statement was recorded  by the Executive Magistrate on 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 27 of 75

 the same day in the afternoon and thereafter in night her statement 

was recorded by the police at her house. She had not stated in her 

statement   u/s   161   
Cr.PC
   that   after   3­4   days   of   marriage,   her 

daughter came to house and she was appearing to be disturbed and 

on her asking she told her that accused Bhagat had asked her to 

bring Rs.1/1.50 lac VOL. She had stated that he was told by her 

daughter   that   her   inlaws   were   demanding   money.   She   had   not 

stated   in   her   statement   u/s   161   Cr.pC   that   Rs.1.00   lac   were 

withdrawn   by   her   husband   from   the   bank   after   one   month   of 

marriage of her daughter. She had not stated in statement
 u/s 161
 

Cr.PC that a sum of Rs.1.00 lac was given to accused Bhagat Singh 

at his house in the presence of his mother and Jyoti. She further 

made improvement by mentioned the name of Jatin and mother in 

law of Jyoti regarding harassing for scooter. The matrimonial house 

of her daughter was situated at the distance of one or one and half 

km from her house. Her daughter stayed in their house for 3­4 times 

till her death. Once she had stayed for 2­3 nights at their house and 

on other occasions she used to come and stay for a night at their 

house. She and her husband had visited the matrimonial house after 

about one month of marriage and thereafter about one and half - 

two months of their first visit. She know Sh SM Sehgal who is 

working in the office of MES where her husband is working as 

contractor. She cannot tell the date and month when the scooter was 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 28 of 75

 purchased by her husband. The male   child was born   to Jatin on 

17.9.08 and at that time she was staying at her matrimonial home. 

She  had not  gone  to  meet  Jatin at  the matrimonial  home of her 

daughter  after her visit to her parental home. Her daughter visited 

their home after 3­4 months of her marriage with accused and her 

visit was before Dussehra. Rs.12,000/­ were given to Jyoti by her 

and her husband from their personal savings. She admitted that in 

her   statement   u/s   161   
Cr.PC
   she   had   stated   that   somehow   her 

husband had given RS.12,000/­ to her daughter and pacified her. 

No landline phone was installed at her matrimonial home Vol. She 

used  to  call  from  the  mobile phone of her husband. On 6.12.08 

Jyoti came and at that time she was alone. Her husband returned at 

about 7/7.30 p.m on that day. She had stated in her statement
 u/s 

161
 Cr.PC that on 6.12.08 they were informed by their daughter 

that her mother in law, husband, sister in law Jatin, brother in law 

Birju   were   harassing   her   since   morning   and   had   also   given   her 

beating to bring Rs.one /one and half lac. She was confronted with 

her statement where the name of only husband is mentioned. She 

denied the suggestion that she is deposing falsely as she was against 

the marriage of her daughter with accused Bhagat Singh. She was 

not told by her daughter on that night she had to accompany her in 

laws to attend some marriage. She denied the suggestion that no 

complaint was lodged with police or the SDM on 10.12.08 as she 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 29 of 75

 was aware that it was an accidental fall of her daughter from the 

railing of the roof when she had gone to pick the dry clothes. 




39.           PW6 Maya Devi is the dadi/grand mother of deceased 

Sucheta@   Jyoti   and   she   has   deposed   that   after   marriage   of   her 

grand daughter she was living at her village near Rewari. Whenever 

her grand daughter met her she told her that she was being harassed 

for want of dowry by her husband, mother in law and sister in law. 

She also asked her to convey it to her mother that she should give 

her   some   dowry.   She   was   told   by   Sushila   that   they   had   given 

Rs.one   lac   and   scooter   to   Bhagat   Singh   vol.   She   had   not   seen 

Sushila and her husband delivering the same. In the same year after 

Diwali   Jyoti   had   died.   She  cannot  say   as  to   how  she  died.   Her 

statement was recorded after about one and one and half month of 

death of Jyoti. Sucheta informed her that she was being harassed by 

her husband, mother in law and sister in law for demand of dowry 

which   she   conveyed   to   his   son   and   daughter   in   law.  She   was 

declared hostile by the prosecution  and cross examined by the 

Ld. APP for the State wherein she has admitted that all the four 

accused persons used to harass Jyoti for demand of dowry and used 

to give her beatings. She denied that her grand daughter had told 

her that she was being taunted by the accused persons. She admitted 



State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 30 of 75

 that she had stated to the police that her grand daughter told her that 

after   about   one   month   of   her   marriage   i.e.   in   June   2008   her 

husband, mother inlaw and her other in laws were demanding Rs.

2.00 lacs in cash and a motorcycle from her and she conveyed this 

fact to her son and daughter in law. In cross examination she has 

stated   that     she   is   residing   in   village   Bawal   Rewari   with   her 

husband. She came to Delhi at the time of marriage of Suchetaand 

Bhagat Singh  and  stayed for 2/3 days. Sucheta did not visit  her 

parents house during this period. She came   to Delhi after about 

one/one and half month of marriage VOL. At that time she met her. 

At that time she reached Delhi at the house of her son Jyoti was not 

there.     VOL.   She   had   come   to   know   that   Jyoti   had   visited   her 

parents house and had informed that she was being harassed at her 

in   laws   house.   She   was   informed   this   fact   by   Jyoti   herself   on 

telephone. She never met Jyoti during her stay. When a question 

was put to her as to whether she was happy when Jyoti got married, 

she replied  'khush to hona hi pada aur kya karte'. She never met 

Jyoti after her marriage till she died, though she had been coming to 

Delhi but she came in  the morning and left in the evening. She 

admitted that her statement recorded by the police   was not read 

over to her. 





40.           PW7 Satbir Singh is the father of deceased and he has 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 31 of 75

 stated   that   his   daughter   was   induced   and   kidnapped   by   Bhagat 

Singh   and   FIR   no.913/07   was   recorded   and   Bhagat   Singh   also 

remained   in   jail.   He   got   solemnized   the   marriage   due   to 

intervention of respectables and given dowry articles, gold chain 

and Rs.21,000/­. After 2/3 days of marriage his daughter came to 

their house and she was disturbed and on being enquired she told 

that she was being harassed by her mother in law and husband and 

they were expecting more dowry . In the evening his daughter went 

back. He has further deposed that after about one month of her visit 

to their house, she had made a call to his wife and told her that 

accused Bhagat Singh had demanded Rs.1.00 lac for his business as 

he wanted to purchase items to be sold at his shop. On 18.6.08 he 

has withdrawn Rs.1.00 lac from his SBI account and paid the same 

to Bhagat Singh at his house on the same day in the evening. Again 

said after seeing the relevant entry of bank record, Rs.2,50,000/­ 

was withdrawn by him out of which Rs.1,00,000/­ was given and 

remaining was kept for business. The amount was withdrawn from 

the account which was in the name of M/s Kapil Furniture which he 

operates, the copy of statement is mark 5/A1 is Ex.PW7/A. He has 

further   deposed   that   next   day   he   accompanied   Bhagat   Singh   to 

Jhandewalan cycle market from where goods were purchased and 

thereafter   his   daughter   was   kept   well.   After   about   2/3   months, 

accused Bhagat Singh had made a call to him and told him to talk to 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 32 of 75

 his daughter. He was told by Jyoti that accused Bhagat Singh was 

quarreling   with   her  for  demand of some more money  from  her. 

Jyoti told him that Bhagat Singh was telling that her parents were 

having two cars and a motorcycle and that they should give a new 

scooter or motorcycle to him. He had purchased a old scooter for 

Bhagat Singh The ownership was not transferred in the name of 

Bhagat Singh as he was not holding a driving licence and it was 

purchased in his name. He has further stated that after about four 

months of marriage his daughter called up and stated that Jitin was 

bless with a son  and stated that chchuchak is to be given to her and 

Bhagat Singh demanded Rs.20,000/­ for that purpose. His daughter 

came to his house and in the evening Bhagat Singh also came to 

take   her   back   and   he   was   given   Rs.12,000/­   by   his   wife   which 

amount she was having of her own since she was also running a 

cloth shop in the house. He has stated that accused  Jitin used to tell 

that   her   parents   were   having   two   cars   and   atleast   they   should 

arrange one car for accused Bhagat Singh. He has further stated that 

on 6.12.08 his daughter came to his house and told that she was 

being harassed by her mother in law and husband and she was sent 

back after she was pacified. On the intervening night of 9/10.12.08 

Jain   Halwal  told   them  that  Jyoti  is serious. They reached at  the 

matrimonial     house   and   then   went   to   hospital   where   she   was 

declared brought dead. On enquiry they were told that Sucheta went 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 33 of 75

 to remove the clothes kept for drying from the roof and she had 

fallen from the roof. His statement was which is Ex.PW7/B. He had 

handed over the marriage car of his daughter, 11 photographs and 

list of dowry articles alongwith statement of bank . Marriage card is 

Ex.P1, photographs are Ex.P2/1 to 11, photocopy of dowry articles 

Ex. PW7/C. He also handed over the copy of RC of scooter no. DL 

9SF   4618   which   is   Ex.PW7/C.   The   RC   was   seized   vide   memo 

Ex.PW7/D. The postmortem on the dead body was conducted on 

13.12.08 and he received the dead body vide receipt Ex.pw7/E. He 

was   declared   hostile   by  the   Ld.   APP   for   the   State  and   cross 

examined   wherein   he  has stated that  Sucheta visited their house 

after 2­4 days of her marriage and told that her husband and mother 

in law had asked to bring Rs.1.00 lac for running of their cycle 

shop. He admitted that he purchased scooter for Rs.10,000/­ from 

Sh SM Sehgal. He admitted other suggestions put by the Ld. APP 

for the State as recorded in his statement
 u/s 161
 Cr.PC.   In cross 

examination he has stated that he is working as Govt. contractor in 

MES (military engineering service) since 1999 and operating from 

his house. He admitted that FIR no. 913/07 was registered on his 

complaint   when   his   daughter   Jyoti   was   taken   away   by   accused 

Bhagat Singh. He admitted that when her statement
 u/s 164
 Cr.PC 

was recorded he accompanied his daughter to court. He denied that 


State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 34 of 75

 his daughter pressurized him that she would get marry with Bhagat 

Singh. Bhagat Singh was acquitted in FIR no. 913/07. He admitted 

that when Bhagat Singh was acquitted, he alongwith his wife and 

daughter were present in the court. On that day they had gone in 

car. On that day Suchitra had accompanied them to the court from 

her matrimonial home. His mobile number is 9891354243 and his 

wife's number is 9911140039. After peg phera he met his daughter 

after one week when she came to their house. His house is situated 

at the distance of about 1­1/1/2 km from her matrimonial home. He 

admitted   that   the   matrimonial   home   of   Sucheta   was   on   way   to 

market from his house. He had visited her matrimonial home during 

her lifetime for 2­3 times. His wife never visited there. His daughter 

never came to stay overnight in his house. There was no demand 

from the side of  accused persons at  the time of marriage of his 

daughter with accused and whatever he had given, was given out of 

his  own  free will.  He had not informed any member of society, 

mediator/members of biradari or his relatives except his mother that 

his daughter was being harassed by accused persons for demand of 

dowry.  She does  not  know if his daughter has stated before the 

court that she was happily living with accused. He admitted that she 

and  his wife had  stated  before the court that their daughter was 

married to accused and was living happily with him. He came back 

to the matrimonial home of Sucheta at about 4 a.m on 10.12.08 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 35 of 75

 from the hospital and stayed for 10­15 minutes. Again he went on 

10.12.2008 and reached at about 9.30­10 a.m. He admitted that the 

shop of Jain Sweets is situated near the house of Bhagat Singh. He 

had not narrated the entire facts in his statement to SDM vol. he had 

only given his statement in brief. He admitted that account number 

10469779033   of   SBI   is   in   the   name   of   his   company   Kapil 

Furnitures. He had never informed the police nor the SDM that he 

had withdrawn Rs.2.50 lacs from his account on 18.6.08. He does 

not recollect that the amount of Rs.1.00 lac, 1.50 lac withdrawn by 

him on different dates as shown in the statement Ex.PW7/A were 

withdrawn   for   what   purpose.   Accused   Bhagat   Singh   was   not 

possessing   any   driving   licence.   Accused   Bhagat   Singh   had 

purchased goods for his cycle shop for RS.50,000/­ to Rs.60,000/­ 

approx. He had not stated in his statement recorded by the police or 

by Sh Surender Singh that accused used to sell cycles at his shop. A 

son was born to accused Jatin before Dusshera in the year 2008. He 

does not know as to after how many days, accused Jain came to her 

parental home after the birth of her son. He had not gone to the 

house of accused Jatin when a son was born to her. None from her 

family had gone to meet Jatin when she came to her parental home 

after birth of her son. The chhuchhak was given to accused Jatin by 

her parents after the birth of her son in Sept. 2008. He did not state 

in his statement that his daughter called him on phone regarding 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 36 of 75

 demand   of   Rs.20000/­   for   chhuchhak.   He   made   various 

improvements   in   his   statement.   He   know   that   on   the   night   of 

9/10.12.2008 accused persons alongwith her daughter had gone to 

attend some marriage and he was told by his daughter that they 

were to attend the said marriage which was in their relation. He was 

told by Bhagat Singh that his daughter had gone to pick up the dry 

clothes from the roof and she had fallen from there.   He denied the 

suggestion   that   his   daughter   was   never   harassed   or   tortured   by 

accused for demand of dowry and no demand as alleged has been 

raised   He   admitted   that   Ex.PW16/A   and   B   were   filled   in   his 

handwriting. He admitted that some of the contents of Ex.PW16/B 

and   his   signatures   on   it   are   in   different   ink.   He   denied   the 

suggestion and Ex.PW16/A &B are false and fabricated documents. 

At   the   time   of   the   sale/purchase   of   the   scooter   no   receipt   of 

payment was executed. 





41.               It is noted from the statements of all these three main 

star witnesses that they were declared hostile by the prosecution on 

some material points   and cross examined by the Ld. APP for the 

State and then they admitted the suggestions put in affirmative by 

the Ld. APP for the State.  However, PW19 Sh Surender Singh the 

then   Executive  Magistrate     has  recorded   the  statements  of  PW5 

Smt. Sushila (Complainant) and PW7 Satbir Singh and on the basis 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 37 of 75

 of statement of PW5, the present case was registered.  I have given 

my thoughtful consideration on the statement of complainant PW5 

Sushila   (mother   of   deceased)   and   PW7   Satbir   Singh   (Father   of 

deceased).  It is necessary to reproduce the same.


                                                  Statement/Vyan 

             'mai Sushila w/o Sh Satbir Singh r/o RZF 905/8 Raj  
             Nagar Part­II, Palam Colony, New Delhi vyan deti  
             hu   ki   mai   divangat   Sucheta   @   Jyoti   ki   maa   hu.  

             Maine apni Ladki ki shadi Bhagat Singh s/o Late Sh.  
             Lal Chand ke saath dinak 18.5.08 ko Hindu riti se  
             yathashakti daan dahej se ki thi. Shadi se pehle karib  
             6 mahine, ladka ladki ko leker frar ho gaya tha. Ek  
             Mahine baad police ne inhe girftar kiya tatha ye ush  
             dauran jail mai band raha. Humne phir biradari ke  
             dabab mai ye shadi ker di. Shadi ke ek mahine baad  
             maine ladki ko Rs.1 lakh uske papa se leker   tatha  
             Rs.50,000/­   apne   paas   se   ladki   ko   diya.   Ladki   ne  
             kaha   tha   ki   dookan  ka saman lana  hai.  Iske  baad  
             kareeb   do   dhai   mahine   baad   ladke   ne   ladki   ke  
             madhyam   se   kehlvaya   ki   tumhere   ghar   mai   2­2  
             gadiya hai mujhe ek motor cycle de do. Tab humne  
             ek scooter jo ki kisi parichit ki thi inko kaam chalane  
             ke liye di. Iske baad ladki ki saas ne ladki ko kaha ki  
             Jiten (nanad) ko ladka hua hai aur rasham ayadgi ke  
             liye   paise   mangwa   lo   tub   maine   Rs.12,000/­   diye.  
             Shanivaar dinak 6.12.2008 ko ladki hamare ghar aae  
             tatha kehne lagi ki hmare uper 1 to 1­1/4 lac kaarj  
             hai   agar   aap   paise   de   do   to   hum   karj   mukt   ho  
             jayenge. Uske baad Mangalvar ko raat ye hadsa ho  
             gaya. Jab bhi ladki se meri baat hoti thi wo batati thi  
             ki mujhe Jitin pareshaan karti thi Mujhe ashanka hai  

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 38 of 75

              ko   meri   ladki   ki   hatya   ki   gai   hai   tatha   ishke   liye  
             zimedaar   hai   mera   damad   Bhagat   Singh,   ladki   ki  
             saas, devar tatha nanad. Unhone dahej ke liye milkar  
             ish ghatna ko anjaam diya hai. Kripya inke khilaph  
             kanooni karyavahi ki jaye tatha inshaf dilaya jaye.  
             Vyan padh liya theek hai.'  
                                                              sd/­
                                                          Sushila

The statement of Satbir Singh, father of the deceased is as under:­

             'ki   mai   mritka   Sucheta @ Jyoti  ka pita hu. Maine  
             apni ladki ki shadi Bhagat Singh ....... ke saath dinak  
             18.5.2008   ko   ki   thi.   Shadi   se   pehle   Bhagat   Singih  
             meri ladki Sucheta ko bhaga le gaya tha jiske karan  
             ye FIR no.913/07 ke tahat, 4 maah jail me band bhi  
             raha, baad mai hamne uske saath ladki ki shadi ker  
             di. Shadi ke ek maah baad maine ladki ke kehne par  
             1 lakh rupee ka saaman Bhagat Singh ko dookan ke  
             liye   dilvaya.   Shanivaar   ko   Dinak   6.12.08   ko   ladki  
             Sucheta 3 baje din me hamaare ghar aae tatha meri  
             patni ko bataya ki hmaare uper 1 lakh ka karaj hai.  
             Hame paise de dijiye taki hum vo utaar sake. Uske  
             baad   maine   kaha   ki   abhi   paisse   hai   nahi   jaise   hi  
             payment milegi mai de dunga. Ladke - Ladki mai aaj  
             tak jo meri knowledge mai aya ek hi baar mun mutav  
             hua   tha   jise   maine   ladki   va   damad   ko   bulakar  
             samjhaya diya tha. Uske baad mere saamne koi baat  
             nahi aae. Mujhe ish hadse ki suchna ratri 1.53 per  
             Jain   Halwai   jo   ki   unke   padosh   mai,   ne   di.   Mujhe  
             ashanka   hai   ko   meri  ladki  ko  maar  ker  sadak  per  
             daal diya gaya tatha baad mai shore macha diya ko  
             ladko   chhat   se gir gai. Ghar mai  hadse ke vakt  5  


State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 39 of 75

              vyakti maujood the, Bhagat Singh, uski maa va bhai  
             tatha   vahar   va   meri   ladki.   Hadse   ke   baad  Bhagat  
             Singh   ki   vahan   mauke   se   bhaag   gai   aisa   mujhe  
             padosiyo   dwara   maloom   hai.   Kripya   inke   khilaph  
             kanooni karyavahi ki jaye. Vyan padh liya sahi hai.  
             Iske atirikat mai ek baat aur kehna chahata hu ko  
             ladko ki Nanad Jitin jab bhi ghar aati thi meri ladki  
             se jhagda karti thi kyonki vo ish baat se naraz thi ki  
             jab   Bhagat   Singh   meri   ladki   ke   saath   frar   tha   to  
             police inke ghar talashi ke liye jati thi'. 

                                                          Sd/­
                                                        Satbir 


42.                   Both the above statements were recorded by SDM on 

11.12.08. These were the first/initial   statements of the parents of 

the deceased. Considering these statements, it is manifest that there 

are contradictory versions of the parents of deceased. Sushila has 

stated that she had given Rs.1.50 lacs while Satbir has not stated 

anything in this respect. He only stated that he provided material 

for shop worth Rs. 1.00 lac. He has not stated about giving of Rs.

50,000/­ by his wife. Satbir has stated that his daughter told him 

that they are under debt of Rs.1.00 lac while his wife Sushila has 

given different version. Sushila did not corroborate the version of 

Satbir that only once there was difference between Bhagat Singh 

and Sucheta. The statements were the first/initial statements. It is on 

record in the statement of PW19 Sh Surender Singh that he had 

requested them to give their statements however they refused and 


State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 40 of 75

 stated that they were disturbed due to the death of their daughter 

and   would   give   their   statements   next   day.   Further   PW22   ASI 

Khajan   Singh   in   cross   examination   voluntarily   stated   that   the 

relatives   of   parents   of  Sucheta  who  had  also  accompanied  them 

were not willing for taking of any legal action against the in­laws of 

Sucheta.   PW17   IO/SI   Rajender   S   Gurjar   has   stated   in   cross 

examination that the parents of deceased Sucheta were called in the 

PS   by   him   but   they   refused   to   give   any   statement.   He   and   the 

Executive Magistrate did  not reduce this fact in writing that the 

parents of deceased were not willing to give statement on that day. 




43.            However, firstly I have considered the evidence for the 

charge  framed
 u/s  498A
/
304B
/
34
 IPC. Taking into consideration 

the deposition  made in the court and above initial  statements of 

PW5&7,   it   is   revealed   that   PW5   Sushila   who   is   the   mother   of 

deceased   Sucheta  has  stated that  they gave double bed, almirah, 

dressing table, utensil, jewellery,clothes, watch and Rs.21000/­ in 

the   marriage.   PW7   Satbir   has   also   stated   about   giving   dowry 

articles in marriage. The said articles were given by them to their 

daughter in marriage as per their own wish.





44.                   PW5 has further stated that after ¾ days of marriage, 

deceased   came   and   told   that   her   in   laws   were   expecting   more 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 41 of 75

 dowry and PW7 has also stated that after 2/3 days of marriage of 

his daughter, she came to his house in disturbed condition and told 

that she was being harassed by her husband and in­laws and they 

were expecting more dowry. It is admitted fact that the marriage 

between accused Bhagat Singh and Sucheta was a love marriage. It 

is also admitted fact that before marriage they both eloped and case 

FIR   no.913/07   was   registered   in   which   later  on  accused   Bhagat 

Singh was acquitted. In the said case deceased as well as PW Satbir 

and   PW   Sushila   were   also   examined   and   they   have   stated   that 

Sucheta is living happily with accused Bhagat Singh. The said FIR 

was decided on 31.05.08.  Further PW6 Maya, dadi (grand mother) 

of Sucheta has stated that she again came to Delhi at the time of 

marriage of Sucheta with accused Bhagat and stayed for 2/3 days. 

She had not visited the matrimonial house of her grand daughter 

during this period. During the said period Sucheta had not visited 

her parents house. Therefore, the said allegation cannot sustain. 




45.               PW5 has further stated in continuation to her statement 

that when Sucheta came after ¾ days of marriage she told her that 

accused Bhagat Singh had asked her to bring Rs.1.00 - Rs.1.50 lac 

from them so that he could put some articles in his cycle shop to 

earn better livelihood. PW7 Satbir Singh has stated that after one 

month of her visit, she made call to his wife and asked that Bhagat 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 42 of 75

 Singh is demanding Rs.1.00 lac for business. Firstly PW5 Sushila 

has   stated   that   she   asked   for   the   said   amount   after   ¾   days   of 

marriage while PW7 has stated that it was asked after about one 

month. Secondly, if it is presumed that the said amount was asked, 

it   was not as dowry but as admitted by PW7, it was for business 

purpose. PW5 has stated that her daughter told that Bhagat Singh 

asked for Rs.1.00 /1.50 lac while PW7 has stated that Rs.1.00 lac 

was asked. 





46.                         PW5 Sushila has further stated that after about one 

month a sum of Rs.1.00 lac was withdrawn from the account of her 

husband which  she  alongwith her husband had given to accused 

Bhagat   Singh   at   his   house   in   the   presence   of   his   mother   and 

thereafter   they   lived   peacefully   for   sometime.   PW7   Satbir   has 

stated that on 18.6.08 he withdraw Rs.1.00 lac and paid the same to 

Bhagat Singh. He again said after seeing the entry of bank record, 

Rs.2,50,000/­ was withdrawn by him out of which Rs.1.00 lac were 

given to Bhagat Singh and Rs.1,50,000/­ were kept for business. 

PW5   has   herself   given   contradictory   version   as   in   her   initial 

statement she has stated that Rs.1.00 lac was given by her husband 

and Rs.50,000/­ was given by her. Further PW7 has never stated 

this   fact   before   SDM   that   he   had   given   Rs.1.00   lac   after 

withdrawing from his bank but to the contrary he has stated that he 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 43 of 75

 provided articles for shop worth Rs.1.00 lac. The prosecution has 

also examined PW3 Sh Vipin Adlakha from SBI where account of 

M/s Kapil Furniture is maintained as the money of Rs.2,50,000/­ 

was withdrawn from the said account on 18.6.2008. I have perused 

the statement Ex.PW3/A. It is admitted fact that this is a current 

account maintained for business purpose. On perusal of the entries, 

it is revealed that an amount of Rs.1,50,000/­ was withdrawn on 

3.6.08, Rs.1.00 lac each were withdrawn on 7.6.08 and 9.6.08, Rs, 

2,50,000/­   was   withdrawn   on   18.6.2008   and   Rs.1,00,000/­   was 

withdrawn on 30.6.08. There is no mention that  an amount of Rs.

1.00 lac was given to accused Bhagat Singh out of Rs.2,50,000/­ on 

any   document.   PW5   in   cross   examination   has   stated   that   her 

husband had handed over Rs.2.00 lac to her after withdrawal of the 

money from the bank, however she is not aware about the exact 

amount withdrawn by him on that day. PW20 IO Insp.SS Rathi has 

stated that he had not verified about the various payments made 

from the account of Satbir Singh to various parties. A question was 

put to PW5 Sushila during cross examination which is as under:


Question:   I   put   it   to   you   that   in   your   statement   recorded   on 
8.11.2010 in the court, you had stated that after about one month of 
marriage a sum of Rs.one lac was withdrawn from the account of 
your   husband   which   you   alongwith   your   husband   had   given   to 
accused Bhagat Singh and today you have stated that your husband 
had given to you Rs.Two lac after withdrawing the said amount 
from the bank and out of which Rs.1.00 had been given to accused 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 44 of 75

 Bhagat Singh. Which of your two statements is correct.



Answer: My statement recorded today is correct.


47.             The witness has made contradictory statement regarding 

giving of Rs.1.00 lac to accused Bhagat Singh. It seems that the 

plea for giving a sum of Rs.1.00 lac was taken after thought just for 

the sake of plea as PW7 has stated in his initial statement that he 

provided goods to accused for shop and never stated that he had 

ever given Rs.1.00 lac in cash. 





48.           PW5 has further stated that after two months her daughter 

told her that her mother in law and nanad Jeetin were harassing her 

by saying that her father was having two vehicles and they could 

not afford to given even a scooter to them and at this her husband 

arranged a scooter  and gave to Bhagat Singh. Admittedly they did 

not demand scooter. PW7 Satbir Singh has stated that after about 

2/3 months, accused Bhagat Singh had made a call to him and told 

her   to   talk   to   his   daughter   Sucheta.   He   was   told   by   Jyoti   that 

accused Bhagat was quarreling with her for demand of some more 

money and she further told him that Bhagat Singh was telling that 

they had two cars and motorcycle and that they should give a new 

scooter  or  motorcycle  to  him. PW7 has not specified as to how 

much more money was demanded by accused Bhagat Singh. He has 


State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 45 of 75

 further stated that he  purchased a old scooter form SM Sehgal and 

gave it to Bhagat Singh. The prosecution has examined PW16 S.M 

Sehgal who has stated that he sold his scooter for Rs.10,000/­ to 

Satbir Singh in the month of August and a sale letter was executed. 

It was observed by the court that there is no document on record 

and there is no evidence that any such document was seized during 

investigation.   During   the   examination   of   this   witness,   original 

documents i.e. form no.29 & 30 were produced by PW Satbir to 

which Ld. Defence counsel raised objection regarding authenticity 

of documents and manipulation during investigation and it was to 

be decided at final stage. The photocopy of form no.29 and form 

no.30 are Ex.PW16/A and B. RC of the scooter is Ex.PW7/C and 

witness   identified   the   scooter   Ex.P3.   His   statement   was   not 

recorded   by   the   police.     He   was   also   declared   hostile   by   the 

prosecution and he denied the suggestion of Ld. APP that he has 

stated to the police that in the month of July/August 2008 Satbir 

Singh came and told him that he wanted to give a 2nd hand scooter 

to his son in law and further told if any 2nd hand scooter for sale is 

in his knowledge to which he replied that he would given his own 

scooter to him. Pw16 has specifically denied that Satbir Singh came 

to   him   for   purchase   of   scooter   for   his   son   inlaw.   In   cross 

examination he has stated that he had not issued receipt regarding 

the payment which he had received from Satbir Singh against the 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 46 of 75

 scooter. The letter of sale Ex.PW16/A was brought by Satbir Singh 

and it was already filled by him. He never had any document to 

show that he had sold the scooter to Satbir Singh. I have perused 

the documents for which the Ld. Defence counsel raised objection 

during examination of PW16. It is on record that these documents 

were not seized by the police during the investigation of this case. 

The   same   were   never   produced   by   PW7   to   the   police   during 

investigation. PW20 IO/Insp. SS Rathi has stated that on 26.2.09 he 

seized the photocopy of RC of scooter no. DL L9SF 4618 already 

Ex.PW7/C from Satbir Singh vide memo Ex.PW7/D. Admittedly 

the RC of scooter was recovered from PW7 Satbir which clearly 

indicate that the scooter would also have been in his possession. 

Further,   seizure   memo   Ex.PW20/D   shows   that   the   scooter 

alongwith   other   articles     were   recovered   by   PW20   alleging   that 

these are dowry articles. Copy of RC shows that the scooter is in 

the name of PW16 S.M.Sehgal. Had the scooter in question was 

given to accused Bhagat Singh, the RC of the same should also 

have   been   recovered   from   him.   But   to   the   contrary,   it   was 

recovered from PW7 Satbir. As admitted by PW7, Bhagat Singh 

was not possessing any driving licence. The form no.29&30 were 

never produced during investigation by PW Satbir to the Police. 

PW16   has   denied   the   suggestion   of   Ld.   APP   for   the   State   that 

Satbir told him that he took scooter to be given to his son­in­law. 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 47 of 75

 Even had no document to show that he had sold the said scooter. 

Therefore the authenticity of these documents are doubtful and it 

could not be established that the scooter in question was given by 

PW7 Satbir Singh to accused Bhagat Singh.





49.                   Another allegation levelled by PW5 in her statement 

recorded before the court is that after ¾ months her daughter came 

in disturbed condition and told that her mother in law, brother in 

law,   husband   are   harassing   and   told   her   to   bring   Rs.20,000/­for 

giving   chhuchhak   to   Jeetin.   They   gave   Rs.12,000/­   to   Jyoti   and 

Bhagat Singh who had come to their house in the evening. PW7 

Satbir has stated that his daughter had called him and his wife that 

Chuchak is to be given to Jeetin and Bhagat Singh demanded Rs.

20,000/­   and when his daughter called him on his mobile phone 

regarding this demand he told her to talk to his wife. His wife called 

him up on the same day and informed about demand of Rs.20,000/­. 

PW5 has not stated that her daughter (since deceased) talked on 

phone on that day and demanded the said amount. PW7 has stated 

that an amount of Rs.12,000/­ was given by his wife from her cloth 

shop to Bhagat Singh while PW5 has stated that it was given by 

them. Further as per the  deposition of PWs, this amount was given 

for chuchak which cannot be termed as demand of dowry. 



State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 48 of 75


 50.             PW7 Satbir has further alleged that his daughter called 

him up on phone and told him that  Jatin used to tell his daughter 

that they had two cars and at atleast they should arrange one car for 

accused Bhagat Singh for his livelihood. He was told about this fact 

by his wife. On perusal of the testimony of PW5 Sushila, wife of 

PW7, it is revealed that she did not state about arranging  of car by 

accused Jatin for accused Bhagat Singh. Further, this fact is also not 

found   mention   in   initial   statement   recorded   by   Executive 

Magistrate.





51.            PW5 Sushila has stated that on 6.12.08, Jyoti came in 

disturbed condition and on enquiry she told to her and her husband 

that her in laws are harassing her since morning and given beating 

and   asked   to   bring   Rs.1.00/1.50  lac   to  clear   the  debt   of  Bhagat 

Singh so that the creditor do not visit their house. She has further 

stated   that   Jatin   extended   threatening   that   if   the   demand   is   not 

fulfilled   she   would   not   be   allowed   to   live   peacefully   and   after 

6.12.08 when her daughter went back to her matrimonial house she 

had not talk with her. PW7 Satbir has stated that on 6.12.2008 in 

the morning his daughter alone came in rickshaw to his house and 

told that she was being harassed by her mother in law and husband 

and she was sent back after she was pacified. In answer to court 

question he  has  stated  that she had only told them that she was 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 49 of 75

 being   harassed   by   her   mother   in   law   and   husband   but   did   not 

disclose  as  to  how  she  was being harassed.  Both the  PWs have 

made contradictory version regarding the allegations as PW5 has 

stated that her daughter told that since morning she is being given 

beating and asked to bring Rs.1.00/1.50 lac while PW7 Satbir who 

is her father has not alleged any such demand in his statement. As 

far as the allegation for beating since morning is concerned, this 

does   not   inspire   confidence   as   no   parents   will   send   back   the 

daughter after pacifying has she been given beatings since morning. 

Further,   there  is  no   MLC  on  record  showing  that  such   beatings 

were given. Had the beatings were given since morning, she would 

definitely have injury/marks on her body which would have been 

clear from MLC. But in this case no MLC is on record. Further, 

there is no allegation made by PW5&7 that deceased Sucheta was 

ever given beatings before 6.12.08. There is also no complaint filed 

on record regarding harassment meted to Sucheta. PW7 has clearly 

stated   that   Sucheta   did   not   disclosed   as   to   how   she   was   being 

harassed   on   6.12.08.   PW5   has   stated   that   before   6.12.08   she 

alongwith her husband had visited the house of accused and had 

told   them   that   they   should  not  harass  Sucheta  and  after  6.12.08 

when her daughter went back she had no talk with her. Had the 

deceased stated about the treatment meted to Sucheta on 6.12.08 as 

alleged   by   PW5,   she   would   have   definitely   talked   to   her   after 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 50 of 75

 6.12.08 but there is no evidence on record that she had ever talked 

to her in between 6.12.08 to 09.12.2008. There is also nothing on 

record   that   the   deceased   had   given   a   call   to   her   parents   on 

09.12.2008. It is admitted fact that on the night of incident accused 

alongwith   deceased   had   gone   to   attend   a   marriage   and   after 

returning   from   there,   the   present   case   incident   had   taken   place. 

Further the house of PW5&7 and matrimonial house of Sucheta is 

at   the   distance   of   about   one   km   as   admitted   by  PW7   even   that 

neither   PW5   nor   PW7   had   tried   to   visit   the   house   of   deceased 

Sucheta after 6.12.08 as to why she was being given maltreatment. 

Both the PW have alleged that the deceased was being harassed 

from the day of her marriage for more dowry. But they did not take 

any step to lodge complaint with the police or settle the matter by 

the intervention of respectables. As per version of PW5, the amount 

of   Rs.1.00/1.50   lac   was   demanded   to   clear   the   debit   of   Bhagat 

Singh so that creditors do not visit their house. It is manifest that it 

was   not   a   demand   for   dowry   but   it   was   to   clear   the   debt.     A 

question was put by the Ld. APP after declaring him hostile  which 

is as under:­

Question: I put it to you that in your examination dated 22.1.2011 
you   had   stated   that   on   6.12.2008   in   the   morning   your   daughter 
alone came to your house in rickshaw and told you that she was 
being harassed by her husband and mother in law and that she was 
sent back after she was pacified and that you also could not explain 


State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 51 of 75

 to the court as to how she was being harassed by her mother in law 
and husband and that the said statement of your is incorrect?

Answer: It is correct that my above statement referred above in my 
examination   in   chief   is   incorrect.   My   statement   recored   today 
regarding the incident dated 6.12.2008 is correct. Due to tension, I 
could not give correct statement on 22.1.2011. 


52.               It seems that this question was put by the Ld. APP, 

only just to fill up lacunae while the witness has clearly admitted 

that on 22.1.2011 when his examination in chief was recorded he 

did  not depose correctly. There is no evidence for any demand of 

dowry   between   6.12.08   to   9.12.2008   and   no   maltreatment   was 

report by deceased to her parents during this period. Had there been 

any such demand or maltreatment, she would have also faced the 

same during these days and consequently she would have reported 

the same to her parents. But this aspect is missing.  The version of 

PW5 Sushila and PW7 Satbir  regarding the incident of 6.12.2008 

is also an improved version as it       does not find mention in the 

initial statement recorded by the Executive Magistrate. 




53.               The prosecution has also examined PW6 Maya Devi 

who   is   the   dadi   of   deceased.   She   has   stated   that   after   marriage 

whenever her grand   daughter met  her she told her that  she was 

being harassed for want of dowry by her husband and inlaws and 


State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 52 of 75

 that she was harassed after one and half month of her marriage. In 

cross examination she  admitted that she is residing in Rewari with 

her  husband.    She  had   not  visited the matrimonial  house of  her 

grand daughter and Sucheta never met her when she came to Delhi. 

She   has   clearly   admitted   that   she   never   met   the   deceased   after 

marriage. She has further stated that she was informed by Jyoti on 

telephone. This witness has not levelled any allegation as to what 

demand was raised by accused which was told to her by deceased 

Sucheta @ Jyoti. She has stated that Sushila told her that they had 

given Rs.1.00 lac and scooter to Bhagat Singh. But she admitted 

that it was not given in her presence. She was also put a question 

during cross examination which is as under:­

Question:   Were   you   happy   when   Jyoti   got   married   to   accused 
Bhagat Singh?

Answer: Khush to hona hi padda aur kya karte.



54.               The answer to above question clearly suggest that PW6 

was   not   happy   with   this   wedlock   since   earlier   accused   Bhagat 

Singh and Sucheta had eloped and thereafter case was registered 

and thereafter  Sucheta got  married with Bhagat Singh. She clearly 

admitted in cross examination that she never met Jyoti after her 

marriage till she died, though she had been coming to Delhi but she 

came in the morning and left in the evening. She admitted that her 

statement recorded by the police was not read over to her. In view 


State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 53 of 75

 of the statement of PW6, she has not stated as to what demand was 

raised by the accused persons as told to her by Jyoti. 




55.                The prosecution has also examined PW14 Ravi Jain 

who   is  the   neighbourer   of   accused   and  who  had  seen  Deceased 

falling from the balcony. He has stated that he did not see any other 

person from the matrimonial house of deceased present there. He 

knocked the door  on which Bhagat Singh and his mother came out. 

He also knocked the house of other neighbourer. He has stated that 

when   the   lady   had   fallen   on   the   ground   she   was   holding   some 

clothes in her hand, the same was consisting of sarees, pant, shirt 

and   some   such   like   clothes   which   were   kept   aside   when   they 

removed   her   to   his   vehicle.   He   was   declared   hostile   by   the 

prosecution wherein he has stated that on that night he was present 

at his shop namely Jain Sweet and preparing sweets for next day 

orders.   In   cross   examination   he   has   stated   that   Bhagat   Singh   is 

running a puncture cycle shop and he does not used to sell cycle on 

his   shop.   At   that   time   parents   of   deceased   did   not   make   any 

complaint to the SDM or to the police against the accused person. 

This witness has turned hostile and did not support the version of 

the prosecution.       





56.               It would be necessary to mention the relevant part of 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 54 of 75

 cross   examination   of   PW5   &   7.   PW5   has   stated   in   cross 

examination that Jyoti was in class 11th when she was taken away 

by Bhagat Singh and that Bhagat Singh  was acquitted by the court 

as she had deposed in the court that she had gone with him on her 

free   will.   She   admitted   that   at   the   time   when   her   daughter   had 

eloped   with   accused,   she   and   her   husband   were   against   their 

relationship. She was not aware about the marriage of her daughter 

with Bhagat Singh after they had eloped.   She had enquired from 

her daughter if she was happy with this marriage at the time of 

discussion with accused Bhagat to which she replied in affirmative. 

When   her   daughter   returned   to   her   house   she   told   her   that   she 

would   marry   Bhagat   Singh   and   nobody   else.   She   admitted   that 

there was no demand of dowry at the time of settlement of marriage 

and when accused Bhagat Singh was on bail in FIR no.913/07. Her 

statement was recorded by the police on the intervening night of 

10/12/08   and   11/12/08.   However,   on   perusal   of   the   file   it   is 

revealed   that     the   statement   on   which   the   present   case   was 

registered was recorded by the Executive Magistrate on 11.12.2008. 

She made various improvements in her statement recorded
 u/s 161
 

Cr.PC. PW7 has also made various improvements in his statement. 

He know that on the night of 9/10.12.2008 accused persons with his 

daughter Sucheta had gone to attend the marriage which in their 

near relation. He was told by Bhagat Singh that his daughter had 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 55 of 75

 gone to pick up the dry cloths from the roof and she had fallen from 

there.   





57.                           It is admitted fact that accused Bhagat Singh and 

deceased Sucheta had eloped together and case FIR no. 913/12 was 

registered.   The   marriage   between   them   was   solemnized   on 

18.5.2008 and thereafter deceased as well as her parents PW5 & 

PW7 made statement before the court that they are residing happily. 

They have also admitted that there was no demand for dowry at the 

time   of   marriage   and   till   accused   was   on   bail.   Therefore   the 

allegation that after 2/3 days or ¾ days deceased told them about 

demand of more dowry/ Rs.1.00 lac/1.50 lac cannot sustain. It has 

further come in evidence that PW5 & 7(mother and father) both 

were against the relationship of accused Bhagat Singh and Sucheta 

and even PW6 Maya Devi was also against this marriage. But it 

was solemnized due to intervention of the respectables of the family 

as they both had eloped together and deceased had also stated that 

she would marry only to Bhagat Singh and none else. Considering 

the fact that both the parents and grand mother of deceased  were 

against marriage, their false implication cannot be ruled out.   




58.                      In  view of the deposition of star witnesses of the 

prosecution, I have also considered some case law and would like 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 56 of 75

 to mention the same for just decision of the case.  
In case law 
Sunil 

Bajaj Vs. State of MP
, 2001 (2) JCC (SC) 262 it is stated in head 

note:­
             'Section 304B­ It is pleaded that last letter of deceased did not 
             mention   any   allegation   of   dowry   demand   -   The   letter   of 
             deceased does not speak of any demand of dowry and there is 
             totally absence of demand of dowry and so 
sec.498A
 of IPC 
             is not at all attracted - Thus the necessary ingredients of the 
             offence of 
sec.304B
 of IPC is absent and so the conviction 
             and   sentence   of   the   appellant   cannot   sustain   and   so   the 
             appellant is acquitted of the conviction
 u/s 304B
 IPC. It is 
             further   stated   that   :   Both   the   courts   below   concurrently 
             committed the appellant - But out of so many witnesses of 
             the neighbour none could say that there was a dowry death 
             and the deceased was soon before her death was subjected to 
             demand   of   dowry   which   was   necessary   ingredient   of   the 
             offence
 u/s 498A
 of IPC committed by the husband or by any 
             of the family members or near relatives'.






In case law 
Baljeet Singh & Anr Vs. State of Haryana
, 2004(1) 

JCC 627 it is stated in headnote that :




               '
Evidence   Act
.   1872   -   Sec.113B­   Presumption­   Dowry 
               death - Against accused persons to be drawn provided the 
               prosecution   establishes   that   soon   before   her   death   if   the 
               woman   was   subjected   to   cruelty   or   harassment   within   7 
               years of marriage'.



               'Dowry death - Onus of proof­ Preliminary facts - Proof of 

               - Onus lies upon the prosecution - High Court erroneously 
               shifted the burden upon the accused - About   the date of 
               marriage   -   Prosecution   is   required   to   prove   that   death 
               occurred within 7 days of marriage - PW4 father   of the 
               deceased was not creditworthy - So were other related PW5 

               - Prosecution failed to discharge its initial onus of proof - 
               PW5 the mother stated that the deceased was depressed - 



State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 57 of 75

                This  indicated  that woman committed suicide in a state of 
               depression  -  Hence  conviction   is  set  aside  and  appeal   is 
               allowed'. 



In case Law  Raman Kumar Vs. State of Punjab, 2009(3) JCC 

1840 it is stated in head note that :



              'Sec.  304B   -   
Evidence   Act,   1872
  -   Sec.  113B   -   Dowry 
              Death - No incidence of demand of dowry or cruelty  or 
              harassment   'soon   before   death'   -   Letter   relied   on   shows 
              demand of articles by her parents by her own and not on the 
              behalf   of   appellant   -   Improvements   in   the   statements   of 
              prosecution   witnesses   -   Prosecution   squarely   failed   to 
              establish accusations against appellant - Appeal allowed - 
              Conviction set aside'. 



In case law 
Harjit Singh Vs. State of Punjab
, (2006) 1 SCC 463 it 

is stated in head note that :


              'Sec. 304B - Dowry death - soon before the death, deceased 
              was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband for 
              or   in   connection   with   demand   of   dowry   -   Once   this   is 
              established,   a  legal  fiction   is   created  under  
section   304B
 
              IPC whereby such death would be called dowry death - On 
              facts   held,   ingredients   of   
Sec.304B
   IPC   r/   sec.   113   B 
              Evidnce Act not satisfied'. 



In case law Tarsen Singh Vs. State of Punjab, 2009 (1) JCC 372 

it is stated in head note that:­
              'One of the essential ingredients amongst others, is that the 
              woman must have been 'soon before her death' subjected to 
              cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with the demand 
              for dowry - Nothing on record to show that any demand of 
              dowry was made soon before her death­ The cause of action 
              appears to be an ego problem on the part of the appellant, 
              namely   the   deceased   had   not   been   coming   to   her 


State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 58 of 75

               matrimonial home - Conviction u/s 304B not proved'. 



In case Law Durga Prasad & Anr Vs. State of M.P, 2010 (3) JCC 1852 it is 

stated in head note that:­


                'Sec. 304B  - Dowry death­  In order  to hold  an accused 
                guilty of an offence of dowry death - it has to be shown 
                that apart from the fact that the woman died on account of 
                burn   or   bodily   injury,   otherwise   than   under   normal 
                circumstances, within 7 years of marriage - It has also to 
                be shown that soon before her death she was subjected to 
                cruelty and harassment by her husband or any relative of 
                her  husband  for,  or  in connection  with,  any  demand   for 
                dowry'. 



                'Sec. 304B - In order to bring home a conviction u/s 304B, 
                it will not be sufficient to only lead evidence showing that 
                cruelty or harassment had been meted out to the victim - 
                But that such treatment was in connection with the demand 
                for dowry'.



59.                Considering the above discussion, to prove the case 

u/s   304B   
IPC
   these   ingredients   have   to   be   proved  (i)  unnatural 

death (ii) within 7 years of marriage and (iii) soon before death she 

was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or relative 

of her husband (iv) such cruelty must be in connection with demand 

of   dowry  (v)  such   cruelty   is   shown   to   have   been   meted   to   the 

woman soon before her death. In this case the death occurred due to 

fall from height.  She was taken  to the hospital by accused Bhagat 

Singh.  The death of deceased Sucheta took place within 7 years of 

marriage and it was unnatural death. So, two ingredients have been 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 59 of 75

 proved by the prosecution. Now it is necessary to find out as to 

whether the deceased was being harassed  soon before her death by 

subjecting   her   to   cruelty   and   demand   of   dowry.   It   is   now   well 

settled in view of a catena of decisions of Hon'ble Apex Court that 

what   would   constitute   'soon   before   her   death'  depends  upon   the 

facts and circumstances of the case.  In this case PW5 Sushila, and 

PW7   Satbir   have   not   made   any   allegations   against   the   accused 

persons   in   their   initial   statements   recorded   by   the   Executive 

Magistrate.   Whatever   allegations   they   have   made   in   those 

statements, that were also contradictory as PW5 had allegedly given 

Rs.1.50 lacs while Satbir has not stated anything in this respect. He 

only stated that he provided material for shop worth Rs. 1.00 lac. 

He has not stated about giving of Rs.50,000/­ by his wife. Satbir has 

stated that his daughter told him that they are under debt of Rs.1.00 

lac while his wife Sushila has given different version. Sushila did 

not   corroborate   the   version   of   Satbir   that   only   once   there   was 

difference between Bhagat Singh and Sucheta. The statements were 

the first/initial statements. It is on record in the statement of PW19 

Sh   Surender   Singh   that   he   had   requested   them   to   give   their 

statements however they refused and stated that they were disturbed 

due to the death of their daughter and would give their statements 

next day. Further PW22 ASI Khajan Singh in cross examination 

voluntarily stated that the relatives of parents of Sucheta who had 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 60 of 75

 also  accompanied  them were not  willing for taking of any legal 

action   against   the   in­laws   of   Sucheta.   PW17   IO/SI   Rajender   S 

Gurjar has stated in cross examination that the parents of deceased 

Sucheta were called in the PS by him but they refused to give any 

statement. He and the Executive Magistrate did not reduce this fact 

in  writing   that   the  parents  of  deceased were not  willing to  give 

statement   on   that   day.   PW5   has   stated   that   her   statement   was 

recorded by police on 10/11.12.2008 while the statement recorded 

by the SDM was recorded on 11.12.2008. There is no explanation 

as   to   what   prevented   PW5   &   PW7   to   make   the   allegations   as 

alleged   by   them   in   their   statements   recorded   u/s   161   
Cr.PC
. 

Further, the marriage between accused Bhagat Singh and deceased 

Sucheta was a love marriage and PW5 & 7 were against it. The 

incident had taken place on the intervening night of 9/10.12.2008. 

Executive Magistrate met the parents on 10.12.2008 in the morning 

but   on   perusal   of   their   statements   it   is   revealed   that   they   were 

recorded on 11.12.2008. It is on record that the parents of deceased 

had refused to give their statements. Therefore false implication of 

accused persons cannot be ruled out. PW5&7 have not deposed that 

they had received any call from Sucheta @Jyoti   soon before her 

death  alleging   demand   for dowry.     The version of above PWS 

cannot   be   termed   as   harassment   for   demand   of   dowry.     The 

chargesheet revealed that on 6.12.208 Sucheta came to the house of 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 61 of 75

 her parents and told that they are under debt of RS.1.00 lac - Rs.

1­1/4 lac and if they give the money, they (she and her husband) 

would be debt free. These lines does not constitute harassment for 

demand   of   dowry   and   it  was  a mere  request  made by deceased 

Sucheta. So, there is no evidence   for harassment on account of 

demand of dowry soon before death in this case. In my view there 

is no evidence available on file in this case that deceased Sucheta 

was subjected to cruelty or harassment on account of demand of 

dowry.     There   is   no   indication   that   there   was   any   cruelty   or 

harassment meted out soon before the death of Sucheta.   Hence, 

ingredients of 
Sec.498A
/
304B
 IPC are not complete in this case. 




60.                I have also considered the statements of other PWS. 

PW1 L/Ct.Urmila is the witness for arrest of accused Veena, PW4 

ASI Jagdish is the FIR recorder, PW8 SI Balram informed about 

incident vide DD no.4A, PW11 HC Satish is the MHCM, PW13 

HC   Rajeev   took   the   photographs   of   the   spot,   PW15   HC   Ram 

Chander  has  stated   about  admission of  deceased  in the  hospital, 

PW17 SI Rajender is the first IO, PW20 Insp.SS Rathi is the second 

IO, PW21 HC Karambir Singh took pullands to FSL, PW22 ASI 

Khajan Singh is from Mobile crime team and PW23 SI Mahesh has 

prepared the scaled site plan. 





State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 62 of 75


 61.             In   this   case   alternative   charge   has   also   been   framed 

against   the   accused   persons   for   the   commission   of   offence 

punishable
 u/s 302
 IPC. I have also perused the testimonies of other 

official   witnesses   as   well   as   relatives   of   deceased   again.   It   is 

revealed   that   in   this   case   no   one   had   seen   the   accused   persons 

killing the deceased. Therefore this case depends on circumstantial 

evidence. It is well settled law that observed by the Apex court in 

Tanviben Pankaj Kumar Devtia Vs. State of Gujarat, 1997(2) 

CC cases SC 98 that court has to be watchful and avoid the danger 

of allowing the suspicion to make the place of legal proof for some 

time unconsciously it may happen to be a short step between moral 

certainty and legal proof ­it has been indicated by   this court that 

there is a long mental distance between may be true and must be 

true and the same divides conjectures from sure conclusions. 
Our 

Hon'ble High court of Delhi in 
Raj Mani Vs. State
  has held that 

where the evidence of last seen together specially considering the 

evidence   of   the   PWS   cannot   be     said   to   prove   with   reasonable 

certainty   that   the   circumstances   of   last   seen   together   has   been 

established beyond a shadow of doubt by the prosecution, the state 

of   circumstances   of   last   seen   together   being   not   free   from 

suspicion. No finding with regard to the proof of circumstances of 

last  seen together can be recorded. It is stated in  Padala Veera 



State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.


FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 63 of 75


Reddy Vs. State of A.P.
 (SCC pp.710­11, Para 10) and in other 

catena   of   Judgments   that   when   a   case   rests   upon   circumstantial 

evidence, such evidence must satisfy the following tests:­


'10. (1) the circumstances from which an inference of guilty is sought to    
            be drawn, must be cogently and firmly established.
       (2) those circumstances should be of a definite tendency unerringly   
            pointing towards guilty of the accused
      (3) the circumstances, taken cumulatively, should form a chain so
           complete that there is no escape from the conclusion that within all
           human probability the crime was committed by the accused and 
           none else; and
      (4) the circumstantial evidence in order to sustain conviction must be
          complete   and incapable of explanation of any other hypothesis
          than that of the guilt of the accused and such evidence should not
        only be consistent with the guilt of the accused but should be  inconsistent 
          with his innocence.






62.             In   the   present   case   in   hand,   deceased   Sucheta   had 

allegedly fallen from second floor balcony in the night time. The 

accused   persons   have   not   taken   any   defence   that   they   were   not 

present     at   the   house   there.   So,   it   is   crystal   clear   that   they   are 

present   at   the   house   at   the   time   of   incident.   PW5   &   7   were 

informed about the incident by PW14 Ravi Jain. It is stated by PW5 

& 7 that when they reached they saw crowd collected outside their 

house and there was pool of blood  and when they enquired it was 

told that their daughter has been taken to DDU Hospital. PW2 Dr. 

Komal   Singh   had   conducted   the   post   mortem   examination   of 


State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 64 of 75

 Sucheta. The PM report is Ex.PW2/A. I have perused the same. The 

following injuries are mentioned in the PM report:

1. CLW 2cm x 0.25 cm on left fronto parietal regions having clotted blood


2. Bruise on left shoulder joint 2x4 cm


3. Bruise on right elbow (O/s) 4 cmx0.5 cm.



63.             The cause of death was opined due to craniocerebral 

injury subsequent to the fall from height. PW2 Dr.Kamal has not 

stated that there was any  sign of struggle on the body of deceased 

detected by him. Had the deceased been murdered and then thrown 

from the balcony, there must have been other medical evidence on 

that aspect but that is missing in this case. 





64.             Ld. Defence counsel has submitted that no recovery has 

been effected on the disclosure statements of accused Bhagat Singh. 

I   have   perused   the   said   disclosure   statements   Ex.PW17/F.   No 

recovery   of   any  weapon  was effected on the basis  of disclosure 

statement. Further the disclosure statement is clear that Jyoti herself 

has jumped from the roof. It also does not disclose that she had 

been given beatings on the alleged day of incident by accused.




65.             The   IO   of   this   case   has   stated   that   he   recovered   the 

exhibits from the spot. The same were sent to FSL. I have perused 

the   result   of   FSL   which   is   Ex.PW18/A   &   B.   On   Ex.S1&   S2 


State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 65 of 75

 Cemented   material,   Ex.4   Concrete   material,   Ex.S­6a   jeans   pant, 

Ex.S7 gauze cloth piece, Ex.S8 blood stained gauze, Ex.S­9a lady's 

shirt,   Ex.S­9c&9d   underwears       human   blood   of   B   group   was 

detected. It is the case of the prosecution that accused Bhagat Singh 

had removed the deceased to hospital. Therefore it is crystal clear 

that blood must have come on his wearing clothes. 




66.             As far as the injury sustained by accused Bhagat Singh 

is concerned, the prosecution has examined PW12 Dr.Avnish who 

appeared   on   behalf   of   Dr.   Rajesh   Saha   who   examined   accused 

Bhagat Singh. He has stated that there were multiple/three healed 

abrasions over ulnar aspect of right hand of reddish violet colour 

with crusting. There were 9 other healed abrasions. The MLC is 

Ex.PW12/A. He has stated that the injuries on the person of patient 

was of duration of about one week and it may be from 2 to 7 days. 

The prosecution could not examine the doctor who prepared the 

MLC of accused Bhagat Singh in this case. PW9 Dr.Yogendra Nath 

Maurya who examined accused on 13.12.2008 with alleged history 

of assault on 10.12.2008 has also noticed  heeled wounds. AS per 

PW2   Dr.   Komal   Singh,   the   injuries   were   of   72   hours   old. 

Considering the duration, no doubt that the injuries sustained by 

accused Bhagat Singh seems to have been sustained by him on the 

day of incident. But there is no evidence that scuffle took place 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 66 of 75

 between him and deceased on that day due to which he murdered 

the deceased. 





67.             
In   case   law  186(2012)   Delhi   Law   Times   411  titled 


Jasvinder Saini & Ors. Vs. State
 it is stated in head note that :­

         '
IPC
   1860   -   Sec.   498A,   302,   304B,   406,   
34
   -


 
Criminal Procedure Code
, 1973 - Sec. 216 - Cruelty, 
         Dowry   Death,   Murder   -   Alternation   of   charges   - 

         Supreme  Court   in   Rajbir @ Raju, VIII(2010)  SLT 
         309 =IV(2010) CCR 381 (SC)= IV(2010) DLT (Crl.) 
         627   (SC)   directed   all   Trial   Courts   in   India   to 
         ordinarily add Section 302 to the charge of 
Section 
         304B
, IPC so that death sentences can be imposed in 
         such heinous and barbarous crime against  women - 
         Charge of Sec 302 can only be added in cases where 
         unnatural death is homicidal in nature - Perusal of 
         autopsy surgeon's report shows that there was prima 
         facie   evidence   on   record   to   show   that   death   of 
         deceased could be homicidal in nature - Additional 
         Sessions Judge justified in framing charges
 u/s 302
 
         IPC against the petitioners.  





68.             In the present case as well as the medical evidence, the 

death in the present case was caused due to fall from height. In my 

view the death in the present case was not a homicidal death. In the 

facts and circumstances of the case, I am of the view that 
sec.302
 

IPC is also not made out in this case.



 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 67 of 75


 69.              
In case law 
Padala Veera Reddy Vs. State of Andhra 

Pradesh
, 1989 Supp (2) S.C.C 706 it is stated in head note that :­

         'Criminal  Trial  - Circumstantial  evidence  - Held, on facts, 
         circumstantial   evidence   not   sufficient   to   conclusively 
         establish guilty of accused persons - Conduct of the accused 
         must be seen in its entirety - Mere suspicion not enough - 
         Penal Code, 1860, Secs. 302/34 and Sec. 498A - 
Evidence 
         Act, 1972
, 
Sec. 8
.




         '
Evidence Act
. 1972 - 
Sec.3
 - 'Proved' - Conviction cannot be 
         based on suspicion, however, strong it may be'. 


It is stated in Ramreddy Rajesh Khanna Reddy Vs. State of A.P 

(SCC P.181 para 26­27) that :­

         'It is now well settled that with a view to base a conviction on 
         circumstantial evidence, the prosecution must establish all the 
         pieces   of   incriminating   circumstances   by   reliable   and 
         clinching   evidence   and   the   circumstances   so   proved   must 
         form such a chain of events as would permit no conclusion 
         other   than   one   of   guilt   of   the   accused.   The   circumstances 
         cannot be on any other hypothesis. It is also well settled that 
         suspicion, however, grave it may, cannot be a substitute for a 
         proof and the courts shall take utmost precaution in finding an 
         accused   guilty   only   on   the   basis   of   the   circumstantial 
         evidence. The story of last seen theory, furthermore, comes 
         into play where the time gap between the point of time when 
         the   accused   and   the   deceased   were   last   seen   alive   and   the 
         deceased   is   found   dead   is   so   small   that   possibility   of   any 
         person other than the accused being the author of the crime 
         becomes impossible. Even in such a case the courts should 
         look for some corroboration'. 





70.               The most important  aspect of the present case  or for 

that matter of any criminal case is a motive.  Undoubtedly, motive 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 68 of 75

 is an important aspect of every criminal trial.   Sometimes motive 

plays an important role and becomes a compelling force to commit 

a crime and, therefore, motive behind the crime is a relevant factor 

for which evidence must be adduced.  A motive is something which 

prompts   a   person   to   form   an   opinion   or   intention   to   do   certain 

illegal act or even a legal act but with illegal means with a view of 

achieve   that   intention.     In   a   case   where   there   is   clear   proof   of 

motive for the commission of the crime, it affords added support to 

the finding of the court that the accused was guilty of the offence 

charged   with,   though   at   the   same   time   the   absence   of   proof   of 

motive  does not   render  the evidence bearing on the guilt  of the 

accused   nonetheless   untrustworthy   or   unreliable.     From   the 

evidence on record as well as facts and circumstances of the case, 

the prosecution has failed to establish any motive to kill deceased 

Sucheta. It is stated in  Yogi Choudhary etc. Vs. State of Bihar, 

2005 CRI. L.J. 2285 that :­

           'Penal Code (45 of 1860) Ss.300, 34 - Murder - Absence of 
           eyewitnesses -  Motive of accused to commit murder found 
           not convincing - Even otherwise, motive alone could not be 
           made basis of his conviction - No evidence that he was present 
           at place of occurrence when murder was committed - As far as 
           second accused was concerned, informant stated in Fardbeyan 
           that   he   recognized   voice   of   that   accused   -   Complete   go­by 
           given to this statement by informant in his examination in court 

           - Stating that he named that accused on suspicion - There was 
           absolutely   no   evidence   against   both   accused   -   entitled   to 
           acquittal'.  



State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 69 of 75


In case law titled 
Pandra Khadia Vs. State of  Orissa
 , 

1992 CRI L.J 762 it is stated in headnote :­

           '
Evidence Act
. 1872, Ss. 3,8 - Penal Code (1860), Ss.299, 300, 
           302   -   Murder   -   Proof   of   -   Case   based   on   circumstantial 
           evidence - Motive of accused not proved by prosecution - Held, 
           that   since   important   circumstantial   evidence   had   been 
           disbelieved absence of proof of motive would weigh in favour of 
           accused'.






71.             The   onus   to   prove   case   u/s   302   
IPC
   is   on   the 

prosecution.     But   in   the   present   case   prosecution   could   not 

discharge its onus by leading cogent and reliable evidence. Suicide 

committed by living human beings for various reasons. There is no 

presumption that every suicide committed by married woman in her 

in law's house or at her parents, house has to be because she was 

suffering harassment at the hands of her husband or her in­laws. 

Some commits suicide because of frustration of not achieving the 

desired goals. In this case the defence of the accused is that she had 

gone   to   bring   clothes   from   balcony.   This   version   has   also   been 

stated by PW14 Ravi Jain who has stated that when Sucheta had 

fallen, she was holding some clothes in her hand and same were 

consisting of sarees, pant, shirt and some such like clothes which 

were kept aside when they removed her to his vehicle. PW17 SI 

Rajender IO of this case has stated in cross examination that he did 



State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 70 of 75

 not   notice   any   clothes   lying   on   the   road   near   the   house   of   the 

accused. I have perused the photographs Ex.pw13/16. In the said 

photographs some clothes are shown to be lying. Though there is no 

evidence as to where these clothes are lying but the plea taken by 

accused seems to be true.





72.              In view of the above overall analysis of the testimonies 

of   the   witnesses   and   in   brief   whatever   allegations   have   been 

levelled by PW5&7 regarding demand of dowry does not inspire 

confidence.     The   important   ingredient   of   'soon   before   death'   is 

missing.     The   circumstances   also   does   not   connect   the   accused 

persons with the present case incident.  So, in this case ingredients 

of 
section 304B
 IPC are absent and there is no allegation for soon 

before death of harassing deceased Sucheta @ Jyoti for demand of 

dowry     because   whatever   allegations   have   been   made   in   the 

statements recorded before the court and recorded by the SDM does 

not inspire confidence.   So, I am of the opinion that Sucheta @ 

Jyoti was not maltreated soon before her death or even at any time 

after marriage by the accused persons.  





73.             In view of   my above discussions and considering the 

case   laws   discussed   above,     this   case     does   not   fall   under   the 

category   of  
section   304B
 IPC and no presumption can be taken 

State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 71 of 75

 against the accused persons
 u/s 113 B 
of Indian Evidence Act. The 

prosecution has failed to bring home the guilt of the accused   u/s 

498A/304B/34 
IPC
.





74.             Realities   of   truth   apart,   the   fundamental   and   basic 

presumption   in   the   administration   of   criminal   law   and   justice 

delivery system is the innocence of the alleged accused and till the 

charges are proved beyond reasonable doubt on the basis of clear, 

cogent,   credible   or   unimpeachable   evidence,   the   question   of 

indicting  or punishing  an accused does not arise, merely carried 

away by heinous nature of the crime or the gruesome manner in 

which   it   was   found   to   have   been   committed.   Mere   suspicion, 

however, strong or probable it may be is no effective substitute for 

the legal proof required to substantiate the charge of commission of 

a crime and grave the charge is greater should be the standard of 

proof required. There is a long mental distance between 'may be 

true' and 'must be true' and this basic and this golden rule only helps 

to   maintain   the   vital   distinction   between   'conjectures'   and   'sure 

conclusions' to be arrived at on the touch stone of a dispassionate 

judicial   scrutiny,   based   upon   a   complete   and   comprehensive 

appreciation   of   all   features   of   the   case   as   well   as   quality   and 

credibility of the evidence brought on record.



State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 72 of 75


 75.              As far as charge
 u/s 302
 IPC is concerned, no one had 

seen accused killing deceased Sucheta. The circumstances of the 

case do no link the accused with the present case crime. The death 

in this case was not a homicidal death.   So, the prosecution could 

not form a chain of circumstances while it is well settled law that in 

a   case   of   circumstantial   evidence   each   and   every   chain   of 

circumstances has to be established by the prosecution by leading 

cogent and reliable evidence pointing the guilt of accused. But in 

the   present   case   the   prosecution   could   not   form   a   chain   of 

circumstances. 





76.           It is well settled principle of law in AIR 2003 SC 3609, 

State of Punjab Vs.Karnail Singh that :­

       "Golden   thread   which   runs   through   the   web   of 
       administration of justice in criminal cases is that if two 
       views are possible on the evidence adduced in the case, 
       one pointing to the guilt of the accused and the other to 
       his   innocence,   the   views   which   is   favourable   to   the 
       accused should be adopted.The paramount consideration 
       of  the  court   is  to   ensure that   miscarriage of  justice is 
       prevented.   A   miscarriage   of   justice   which   may   arise 
       from the acquittal of the guilty is not less than from the 
       conviction of an innocent".



77.             In over all analysis of the testimonies of the witnesses, 

this case does not fall under the category of 304B 
IPC
 and I also did 


State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 73 of 75

 not   find   any   evidence   against   the   accused   persons   for   the 

commission of offence punishable
 u/s 498A
 IPC. The prosecution 

also   could   not   form   the   chain   of   circumstances   to   establish   the 

charge   u/s   302   
IPC
.   So,   I   am   of   the   considered   view   that   the 

prosecution has failed to prove its case against the accused persons. 

In such circumstances, the accused persons are entitled to be given 

the   benefit   of   doubt.   I,   therefore   give   the   benefit   of   doubt   to 

accused   persons   and   I     therefore,   hereby   acquit   accused   Bhagat 

Singh   Sharma,   Bijender   Sharma   and   Smt.   Beena     for   the 

commission   of   offence   punishable   u/s   498A/304B/34   
IPC
   and 

accused Jatin is also acquitted
 u/s 498A
/
34
 IPC. All the accused are 

also   acquitted   from   alternative   charge   u/s   302/34   
IPC
.   Accused 

Bhagat Singh Sharma, Beena and Jitin are on bail. Their BB/SB are 

cancelled and sureties are discharged. Accused Vijender is in JC. 

He be released from the jail forthwith if not required in any other 

case.  File be consigned to record room.



Announced in the open Court 
on 31.08.2012

                                                      (SURESH CHAND RAJAN)
                                                      ADDL.SESSIONS JUDGE/
                                                        SPECIAL JUDGE(NDPS)
                                                                    NEW DELHI




State Vs.Bhagat Singh Sharma etc.

FIR no.121/08                                                                   Page No. 74 of 75



