



[Cites 
20
, Cited by 
1
]




Punjab-Haryana High Court


Pratham Singh vs Rajesh on 3 December, 2014


Equivalent citations: AIR 2015 (NOC) 492 (P.&H.)


Author: 
Ajay Kumar Mittal


Bench: 
Ajay Kumar Mittal


                     FAO-M-347 of 2013                                                     -1-

                     IN THE HIGH COURT OF PUNJAB AND HARYANA AT CHANDIGARH


                                                                 FAO-M-347 of 2013

                                                                 Date of decision: 3.12.2014

                     Pratham Singh
                                                                              ,,Appellant
                                              Vs.

                     Rajesh
                                                                              ,..Respondent



                     CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AJAY KUMAR MITTAL
                            HON'BLE MRS. JUSTICE SNEH PRASHAR


                     Present: Mr. Vikas Kumar, Advocate for the appellant.
                              Mr. Shiv Kumar, Advocate for the respondent.


                     Ajay Kumar Mittal,J.



                     1.          This appeal has been preferred by the appellant - husband

                     against the judgment and decree dated 3.10.2013 passed by the trial

                     court, whereby the petition filed by him under 
section 13
 of the Hindu

                     Marriage Act, 1955 (in short, "the Act") for dissolution of marriage on the

                     grounds of cruelty and desertion has been dismissed.


                     2.          A few facts relevant for the decision of the controversy

                     involved as available on the record may be noticed. Marriage between

                     the parties was solemnized on 8.7.1992 according to Hindu rites and

                     ceremonies. The appellant was under JBT training from 28.9.1992 to

                     July 1994 and came into government job on 14.10.1995. No issue was

                     born out of the said wedlock. The parties lastly resided together as

                     husband and wife at the house of the appellant at Aurangabad. The

                     marriage was simple. From the very beginning, behaviour of the

                     respondent was not good towards the appellant and his family members.

GURBACHAN SINGH


2015.02.05 12:14


I attest to the accuracy and


authenticity of this document


High Court Chandigarh


                      FAO-M-347 of 2013                                                    -2-


                     She was interested to live in her parental house. The appellant is

                     M.A.B.Ed and physically handicapped person. The respondent never

                     liked him and disregarded him. She also wanted to live separately with

                     the appellant from his parents. The appellant even accepted her demand

                     and started living at house No.756 w.e.f 22.10.1995. Despite that, her

                     behaviour did not change. She used to curse the appellant to be a

                     handicapped person. On 18.12.1997, she gave beating to the appellant

                     with lathi blows. A complaint dated 18.12.1997 was lodged by the

                     appellant against the respondent.     In 1999, the respondent left the

                     matrimonial home. On the request of the appellant and his family

                     members, she came back. On 14.10.2000, she again left the

                     matrimonial home. The appellant felt shocked when he and his family

                     members were got involved in a false criminal case by lodging FIR dated

                     27.3.2001 by the respondent under 
Sections 498A
, 
406
, 
506
 IPC. The

                     appellant was arrested on 4.4.2001 and remained in jail for four days till

                     8.4.2001 before getting bail. However, the appellant and his family

                     members were acquitted vide order dated 28.7.2010 by the trial court.

                     The appeal filed by the respondent against acquittal was also dismissed.

                     She filed application under 
section 125
 Cr.PC for maintenance. She was

                     granted Rs.3000/- per month as maintenance which was paid by the

                     appellant regularly. The respondent also filed complaint under 
sections

                     494
/
109
 IPC against the appellant and his family members which was

                     also dismissed. Ultimately, the appellant filed petition under 
Section 13


                     of the Act for dissolution of marriage on the grounds of cruelty and

                     desertion.   Upon notice, the respondent appeared and filed written

                     statement controverting the averments made in the petition. The trial

                     court after examining the entire evidence on record dismissed the

GURBACHAN SINGH


2015.02.05 12:14


I attest to the accuracy and


authenticity of this document


High Court Chandigarh


                      FAO-M-347 of 2013                                                     -3-


                     petition vide impugned judgment and decree dated 3.10.2013. Hence

                     the instant appeal by the appellant husband.



                     3.            We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused

                     the record.



 
4.            Learned counsel for the appellant husband submitted that

                     the trial court erred in law in dismissing the petition under 
section 13
 of

                     the Act filed by the appellant. The respondent wife is living separately

                     since 14.10.2000. No issue was born out of the wedlock. Her behaviour

                     towards the appellant and his family members was not good from the

                     very beginning. She had no intention to live with the appellant. She used

                     to curse the appellant being a handicapped person. The behaviour of the

                     respondent caused mental cruelty to the appellant. Reliance was placed

                     on judgments in 
Vidhya Vishwanathan vs. Kartik Balakrishnan
, 2014

                     (4) RCR 563 and Vishwanath Agrawal vs. Sarla Vishwanath Agrawal,

                     (2012) 7 SCC 288.
 
In view of pronouncement of the Apex Court in

                     
K.Srinivas Rao vs. D.A.Deepa
, (2013) 5 SCC 226, it was contended

                     that cruelty was caused by the respondent-wife as false criminal

                     complaint filed by her against the appellant and his family members had

                     resulted in their acquittal in proceedings under 
section 406
, 
498A
, 
506
 of

                     the Indian Penal Code and the appellant is entitled to the grant of

                     divorce.




                     5.            On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent

                     supported the impugned judgment and decree.



                     6.            
Section 13(1)(ia)
 of the Act empowers the Court to dissolve

                     the matrimonial ties between the parties by a decree of divorce on a

                     petition by either spouse where the said spouse has been treated with

                     cruelty after the solemnization of the marriage. Cruelty has not been

GURBACHAN SINGH


2015.02.05 12:14


I attest to the accuracy and


authenticity of this document


High Court Chandigarh


                      FAO-M-347 of 2013                                                     -4-


                     defined in the Act but various pronouncements of the Apex Court and

                     other High Courts have outlined the scope of the term 'cruelty'. Cruelty

                     is evident where one spouse treats the other and manifests such

                     feelings towards him or her as to cause reasonable apprehension that it

                     will be harmful or injurious to live with the other spouse. Cruelty may be

                     physical or mental. Whether a spouse is inflicted with physical cruelty or

                     not, it can be judged on the basis of direct evidence whereas mental

                     cruelty is to be inferred on analyzing the factual matrix of each case and

                     drawing conclusion thereon.



 
7.          Further, in 
Vidhya Vishwanathan
's case (supra), it was

                     held by the Apex Court as under:-




                                       "13.   
In 
Vinita Saxena vs. Pankaj Pandit
 (2006) 3

                                       SCC 778 regarding legal proposition on aspect of

                                       cruelty has made the following observations:


                                              "31.   It is settled by a catena of decisions that

                                              mental cruelty can cause even more serious

                                              injury than the physical harm and create in the

                                              mind of the injured appellant such apprehension

                                              as is contemplated in the section. It is to be

                                              determined on whole facts of the case and the

                                              matrimonial relations between the spouses. To

                                              amount to cruelty, there must be such wilful

                                              treatment of the party which caused suffering in

                                              body or mind either as an actual fact or by way

                                              of apprehension in such a manner as to render

                                              the continued living together of spouses harmful

                                              or injurious having regard to the circumstances

GURBACHAN SINGH


2015.02.05 12:14


I attest to the accuracy and


authenticity of this document


High Court Chandigarh


                      FAO-M-347 of 2013                                                     -5-


                                             of the case.



                                             32.   The word "cruelty" has not been defined

                                             and it has been used in relation to human

                                             conduct or human behaviour. It is the conduct in

                                             relation to or in respect of matrimonial duties

                                             and obligations. It is a course of conduct and

                                             one which is adversely affecting the other. The

                                             cruelty may be mental or physical, intentional or

                                             unintentional. There may be cases where the

                                             conduct complained of itself is bad enough and

                                             per se unlawful or illegal. Then the impact or the

                                             injurious effect on the other spouse need not be

                                             enquired into or considered. In such cases, the

                                             cruelty will be established if the conduct itself is

                                             proved or admitted."



                     8.         Still further, in Vishwanath Agrawal's case (supra), it was

                     observed as under:-



                                      "24.   
In 
Shobha Rani v. Madhukar Reddi
, while

                                      dealing with 'cruelty' under 
Section 13(1)(ia)
 of the

                                      Act, this Court observed that the said provision does

                                      not define 'cruelty' and the same could not be defined.

                                      The 'cruelty' may be mental or physical, intentional or

                                      unintentional. If it is physical, the court will have no

                                      problem to determine it. It is a question of fact and

                                      degree. If it is mental, the problem presents difficulty.

                                      Thereafter, the Bench proceeded to state as follows:


                                             "4.....First, the enquiry must begin as to the

GURBACHAN SINGH


2015.02.05 12:14


I attest to the accuracy and


authenticity of this document


High Court Chandigarh


                      FAO-M-347 of 2013                                                    -6-


                                          nature of the cruel treatment. Second, the

                                          impact of such treatment on the mind of the

                                          spouse.     Whether      it    caused     reasonable

                                          apprehension that it would be harmful or

                                          injurious to live with the other. Ultimately, it is a

                                          matter of inference to be drawn by taking into

                                          account the nature of the conduct and its effect

                                          on   the   complaining        spouse.   There   may,

                                          however,    be    cases       where     the   conduct

                                          complained of itself is bad enough and per se

                                          unlawful or illegal. Then the impact or the

                                          injurious effect on the other spouse need not be

                                          enquired into or considered. In such cases, the

                                          cruelty will be established if the conduct itself is

                                          proved or admitted."



 
25.   After so stating, this Court observed in 
Shobha

                                    Rani
 case about the marked change in life in modern

                                    times and the sea change in matrimonial duties and

                                    responsibilities. It has been observed that:


                                           "5.... when a spouse makes a complaint about

                                          treatment of cruelty by the partner in life or

                                          relations, the court should not search for

                                          standard in life. A set of facts stigmatized as

                                          cruelty in one case may not be so in another

                                          case. The cruelty alleged may largely depend

                                          upon the type of life the parties are accustomed

                                          to or their economic and social conditions. It

GURBACHAN SINGH


2015.02.05 12:14


I attest to the accuracy and


authenticity of this document


High Court Chandigarh


                      FAO-M-347 of 2013                                                 -7-


                                          may also depend upon their culture and human

                                          values to which they attach importance."


 
26.   Their Lordships in 
Shobha Rani
 case referred

                                    to the observations made in Sheldon v. Sheldon

                                    (1966) 2 WLR 993, wherein Lord Denning stated, "the

                                    categories of cruelty are not closed".
 
Thereafter, the

                                    Bench proceeded to state thus: (
Shobha Rani
 case,

                                    (1988) 1 SCC 105) SCC p. 109, paras 5-6)-




                                          "5. ......Each case may be different. We deal

                                          with the conduct of human beings who are not

                                          generally similar. Among the human beings

                                          there is no limit to the kind of conduct which

                                          may constitute cruelty. New type of cruelty may

                                          crop up in any case depending upon the human

                                          behaviour, capacity or incapability to tolerate

                                          the conduct complained of. Such is the

                                          wonderful (sic) realm of cruelty.



                                          6.     These    preliminary   observations     are

                                          intended to emphasise that the court in

                                          matrimonial cases is not concerned with ideals

                                          in family life. The court has only to understand

                                          the spouses concerned as nature made them,

                                          and consider their particular grievance. As Lord

                                          Ried observed in Gollins v. Gollins, 1964 AC

                                          644:



                                          "....In matrimonial affairs we are not dealing with

                                          objective standards, it is not a matrimonial

GURBACHAN SINGH


2015.02.05 12:14


I attest to the accuracy and


authenticity of this document


High Court Chandigarh


                      FAO-M-347 of 2013                                                   -8-


                                          offence to fall below the standard of the

                                          reasonable man (or the reasonable woman).

                                          We are dealing with this man or this woman."


                                          (emphasis in original).



                                    27. 
In 
V. Bhagat v. D. Bhagat (Mrs.
), (1994) 1 SCC

                                    337, a two-Judge Bench referred to the amendment

                                    that had taken place in 
Sections 10
 and 
13(1)(ia)
 after

                                    the Hindu Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976 and

                                    proceeded to hold that the earlier requirement that

                                    such cruelty has caused a reasonable apprehension

                                    in the mind of a spouse that it would be harmful or

                                    injurious for him/her to live with the other one is no

                                    longer   the   requirement.     Thereafter,   this   Court

                                    proceeded to deal with what constitutes mental cruelty

                                    as contemplated in 
Section 13(1)(ia)
 and observed

                                    that mental cruelty in the said provision can broadly

                                    be defined as that conduct which inflicts upon the

                                    other party such mental pain and suffering as would

                                    make it not possible for that party to live with the

                                    other. To put it differently, the mental cruelty must be

                                    of such a nature that the parties cannot reasonably be

                                    expected to live together. The situation must be such

                                    that the wronged party cannot reasonably be asked to

                                    put up with such conduct and continue to live with the

                                    other party. It was further observed, while arriving at

                                    such conclusion, that regard must be had to the social

                                    status, educational level of the parties, the society

GURBACHAN SINGH


2015.02.05 12:14


I attest to the accuracy and


authenticity of this document


High Court Chandigarh


                      FAO-M-347 of 2013                                                 -9-


                                    they move in, the possibility or otherwise of the parties

                                    ever living together in case they are already living

                                    apart and all other relevant facts and circumstances.

                                    What is cruelty in one case may not amount to cruelty

                                    in another case and it has to be determined in each

                                    case keeping in view the facts and circumstances of

                                    that case. That apart, the accusations and allegations

                                    have to be scrutinized in the context in which they are

                                    made. Be it noted, in the said case, this Court quoted

                                    extensively from the allegations made in the written

                                    statement and the evidence brought on record and

                                    came to hold that the said allegations and counter

                                    allegations were not in the realm of ordinary plea of

                                    defence and did amount to mental cruelty.




                                    28. 
In 
Praveen Mehta v. Inderjit Mehta
, (2002) 5

                                    SCC 706, it has been held that mental cruelty is a

                                    state of mind and feeling with one of the spouses due

                                    to behaviour or behavioural pattern by the other.

                                    Mental cruelty cannot be established by direct

                                    evidence and it is necessarily a matter of inference to

                                    be drawn from the facts and circumstances of the

                                    case. A feeling of anguish, disappointment, and

                                    frustration in one spouse caused by the conduct of the

                                    other can only be appreciated on assessing the

                                    attending facts and circumstances in which the two

                                    partners of matrimonial life have been living. The facts

                                    and circumstances are to be assessed emerging from

GURBACHAN SINGH


2015.02.05 12:14


I attest to the accuracy and


authenticity of this document


High Court Chandigarh


                      FAO-M-347 of 2013                                                -10-


                                    the evidence on record and thereafter, a fair inference

                                    has to be drawn whether the Petitioner in the divorce

                                    petition has been subjected to mental cruelty due to

                                    the conduct of the other.




 
29 In 
Vijaykumar Ramchandra Bhate v. Neela

                                    Vijaykumar Bhate
 (2003) 6 SCC 334, it has been

                                    opined that a conscious and deliberate statement

                                    levelled with pungency and that too placed on record,

                                    through the written statement, cannot be so lightly

                                    ignored or brushed aside.




                                    30. 
In 
A. Jayachandra v. Aneel Kaur
, (2005) 2 SCC

                                    22, it has been ruled that the question of mental

                                    cruelty has to be considered in the light of the norms

                                    of marital ties of the particular society to which the

                                    parties belong, their social values, status and

                                    environment in which they live. If from the conduct of

                                    the spouse, it is established and/or an inference can

                                    legitimately be drawn that the treatment of the spouse

                                    is such that it causes an apprehension in the mind of

                                    the other spouse about his or her mental welfare, then

                                    the same would amount to cruelty. While dealing with

                                    the concept of mental cruelty, enquiry must begin as

                                    to the nature of cruel treatment and the impact of such

                                    treatment in the mind of the spouse.
 It has to be seen

                                    whether the conduct is such that no reasonable

                                    person would tolerate it.



                                    31. 
In 
Vinita Saxena v. Pankaj Pandit
,       (2006) 3

GURBACHAN SINGH


2015.02.05 12:14


I attest to the accuracy and


authenticity of this document


High Court Chandigarh


                      FAO-M-347 of 2013                                                 -11-


                                    SCC 778, it has been ruled that as to what constitutes

                                    mental cruelty for the purposes of 
Section 13(1)(ia)


                                    will not depend upon the numerical count of such

                                    incident or only on the continuous course of such

                                    conduct but one has to really go by the intensity,

                                    gravity and stigmatic impact of it when meted out

                                    even once and the deleterious effect of it on the

                                    mental attitude necessary for maintaining a conducive

                                    matrimonial home.




                                    32. 
In 
Samar Ghosh v. Jaya Ghosh
, (2007) 4 SCC

                                    511, this Court, after surveying the previous decisions

                                    and referring to the concept of cruelty, which includes

                                    mental cruelty, in English, American, Canadian and

                                    Australian cases, has observed that the human mind

                                    is extremely complex and human behaviour is equally

                                    complicated. Similarly, human ingenuity has no

                                    bound, therefore, to assimilate the entire human

                                    behaviour in one definition is almost impossible. What

                                    is cruelty in one case may not amount to cruelty in the

                                    other case. The concept of cruelty differs from person

                                    to person depending upon his upbringing, level of

                                    sensitivity,   educational,   family    and     cultural

                                    background, financial position, social status, customs,

                                    traditions, religious belief, human values and their

                                    value system. Apart from this, the concept of mental

                                    cruelty cannot remain static; it is bound to change with

                                    the passage of time, impact of modern culture through

GURBACHAN SINGH


2015.02.05 12:14


I attest to the accuracy and


authenticity of this document


High Court Chandigarh


                      FAO-M-347 of 2013                                                -12-


                                    print and electronic media and value system, etc. etc.

                                    What may be mental cruelty now may not remain

                                    mental cruelty after a passage of time or vice versa.

                                    There can never be any straitjacket formula or fixed

                                    parameters    for   determining   mental   cruelty   in

                                    matrimonial matters. The prudent and appropriate

                                    way to adjudicate the case would be to evaluate it on

                                    its peculiar facts and circumstances.




                                    33. 
In 
Suman Kapur v. Sudhir Kapur
, (2009) 1 SCC

                                    422, after referring to various decisions in the field,

                                    this Court took note of the fact that the wife had

                                    neglected to carry out the matrimonial obligations and

                                    further, during the pendency of the mediation

                                    proceeding, had sent a notice to the husband through

                                    her advocate alleging that he had another wife in USA

                                    whose identity was concealed. The said allegation

                                    was based on the fact that in his income-tax return,

                                    the husband mentioned the "Social Security Number"


                                    of his wife which did not belong to the wife, but to an

                                    American lady. The husband offered an explanation

                                    that it was merely a typographical error and nothing

                                    else. The High Court had observed that taking undue

                                    advantage of the error in the "Social Security

                                    Number", the wife had gone to the extent of making

                                    serious allegation that the husband had married an

                                    American woman whose "Social Security Number"


                                    was wrongly typed in the income-tax return of the

GURBACHAN SINGH


2015.02.05 12:14


I attest to the accuracy and


authenticity of this document


High Court Chandigarh


                      FAO-M-347 of 2013                                                    -13-


                                       husband. This fact also weighed with this Court and

                                       was treated that the entire conduct of the wife did

                                       tantamount to mental cruelty."



                     9.          
In 
K.Srinivas Rao
's case (supra), similar view was taken.


                     10.         A perusal of the record shows that the marriage of the

                     appellant with the respondent was solemnized in the year 1992. No

                     issue was born out of the wedlock. The appellant being a physically

                     handicapped person, the respondent used to curse him. She never liked

                     him. She even gave beating to him with lathi. From the very beginning,

                     her attitude was not good towards the appellant and his family members.

                     She always wanted to live in her parental house whenever the appellant

                     was on training. She left the matrimonial home several times and on the

                     efforts made by the appellant and his family members, she used to come

                     back. She finally left the matrimonial home on 14.10.2000 and had

                     deserted the husband. Further, her complaint under 
sections 498A
, 
406
,

                     
506
 IPC against the appellant and his family members was dismissed.

                     
Even appeal against the aforesaid order was also dismissed.           Her

                     complaint under 
sections 494
/
109
 IPC remained unsuccessful. The trial

                     court thus was not right in dismissing the petition filed by the appellant

                     husband. It has been authoritatively held by the Apex Court in 
K.

                     Srinivas Rao
's case (supra) and a Division Bench of this Court in

                     
Imlesh v. Amit
, AIR 2014 Punjab and Haryana 89 that where the wife

                     files false criminal complaint against the husband and his family

                     members under 
Sections 406
, 
498A
 of the Indian Penal Code which

                     results in their acquittal, this act of the wife causes mental cruelty and

                     the husband is entitled to a decree of divorce under 
Section 13(1)(ia)
 of

                     the Act. Considering the overall facts and circumstances of the case, we

GURBACHAN SINGH


2015.02.05 12:14


I attest to the accuracy and


authenticity of this document


High Court Chandigarh


                      FAO-M-347 of 2013                                                    -14-


                     do not find any ground to uphold the findings recorded by the trial court.

                     As a result, we set aside the impugned judgment and decree dated

                     3.10.2013.   The appeal filed by the appellant stands allowed.        The

                     appellant is granted decree of divorce on the grounds of cruelty and

                     desertion caused by the respondent-wife.


                                                                       (Ajay Kumar Mittal)
                                                                             Judge


                     December 03, 2014                                  (Sneh Prashar)
                     gbs                                                    Judge





GURBACHAN SINGH


2015.02.05 12:14


I attest to the accuracy and


authenticity of this document


High Court Chandigarh


 

