



[Cites 
3
, Cited by 
4
]




Madhya Pradesh High Court


Ramkumar Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 August, 2014


                                1
                                            M.Cr.C.No.7046/2014

             (Ramkumar Singh Vs. State of MP)
21.08.2014
      Shri R.N. Sharma, Advocate for the applicant.
      Shri P.S. Raghuvanshi Public Prosecutor            for   the
respondent/State.


      Case Diary is perused.

      Learned counsel for the rival parties are heard.



      Applicant apprehends arrest in connection with offences
punishable u/Ss. 304B and 34 of 
IPC
 and 3/ 4 of 
Dowry
Prohibition Act
 registered as Crime No.525/2013 at Police
Station Citiy Kotwali, District Bhind.



      Learned Public Prosecutor for the State opposed the
application and prayed for its rejection by contending that on the
basis of the allegations and the material available on record, no
case for grant of anticipatory bail is made out.



      The applicant apprehends arrest in respect of offences
punishable u/Ss. 304B and       34 of 
IPC
 and 3/ 4 of 
Dowry
Prohibition Act
 where the allegation of dowry demand related
cruelty has been made against the applicant who is said to be
the uncle-in-law of the deceased who died due to hanging.
Statement of father of the deceased indicates that on the very
same day of the incident the deceased had called him and told
him about her husband, mother- in- law, sister- in- law and the
present petitioner beating the deceased. The PM Report does
not indicate any external injury on the body except ligature mark.
The marriage had taken place about five years back from the

                                       2


                                                    M.Cr.C.No.7046/2014


date of incident. The            applicant is maintaining separate
establishment as per the ration card annexed along with list of
documents dated 5.8. 2014. In view of the above, this Court is
inclined to extend the benefit of bail to the applicant.

      Accordingly, without expressing any opinion on merits of
the case,      this application
 u/S 438
 Cr.P.C is allowed in the
following terms.

      It is hereby directed that in the event of arrest, the
applicant shall be released on bail on furnishing a personal bond
of Rs.100,000/-(Rupees One Lac only) with two solvent
sureties of the like amount to the satisfaction of Arresting
Authority.



       This order will remain operative subject to compliance of
the following conditions by the applicant :-



   1. The applicant will comply with all the terms and conditions of the
      bond executed by him;

   2. The applicant will cooperate in the investigation/trial, as the case may
      be;

   3. The applicant will not indulge himself in extending inducement,
      threat or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case
      so as to dissuade him/her from disclosing such facts to the Court or to
      the Police Officer, as the case may be;

   4. The applicant shall not commit an offence similar to the offence of
      which he is accused;

   5. The applicant will not seek unnecessary adjournments during the
      trial; and

   6. The applicant will not leave India without previous permission of the
      trial Court/Investigating Officer, as the case may be.

                                   3


                                             M.Cr.C.No.7046/2014


          A copy of this order be sent to the Court concerned for
     compliance.

          C.c. as per rules.



                                             (Sheel Nagu)
                                                Judge
ar
 

