[Cites 
18
, Cited by 
4
]




Himachal Pradesh High Court


Bimla Devi And Others vs State Of Himachal Pradesh And Another on 1 August, 2017


Author: 
Tarlok Singh Chauhan


Bench: 
Tarlok Singh Chauhan


    IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH, SHIMLA




                                                                           .

                                             Cr.MMO No. 73 of 2017.



                                             Date of decision: 01.08.2017.



     Bimla Devi and others                                               .....Petitioners.

                                     Versus





     State of Himachal Pradesh and another                               ..... Respondents.



     Coram


     The Hon'ble Mr. Justice Tarlok Singh Chauhan, Judge.



     Whether approved for reporting?1No
     For the Petitioners               :    Mr. Ashok Kumar Verma, Advocate.



     For the Respondents               :     Ms. Meenakshi Sharma, Addl. A.G.
                                             with Mr. Ramesh Thakur, Dy. A.G., for
                                             respondent No.1.



                                             Mr. Devinder K. Sharma, Advocate,
                                             for respondent No.2.



     Tarlok Singh Chauhan, Judge (Oral).



                     When the matter came up on 11.7.2017, this Court passed the

     following order:



                     "Looking to the nature of controversy, I feel it is a fit case
                     where parties can jointly sit down and settle the dispute.
                     Accordingly, Shri S.C. Sharma, Advocate, is appointed as
                     Mediator. Let, parties to appear before the learned Mediator
                     during the course of the day."

     2.              It is heartening to note that the parties have amicably settled

     the dispute and have executed a compromise deed in the following terms:



                     "Compromise deed"



                             This deed of compromise is executed between Smt.
                     Bimla Devi, wife of Sh. Khayali Ram, Smt. Sunita Devi, wife of
                     Sh. Ramesh Chand, Ramesh Chand son of Sh. Khayali Ram,
     Whether the reporters of the local papers may be allowed to see the Judgment?Yes





                                                        ::: Downloaded on - 03/08/2017 23:56:54 :::HCHP


                               2





        residents of Village Manyoh,P.O. Tihra, Tehsil Sarkaghat,
        District Mandi, H.P. (hereinafter referred to as first party) and




                                                       .

        Sh. Parhalad Chand, son of Sh. Shankar Dass, R/o Village





        Manyoh, P.O. Tihra, Tehsil Sarkaghat, District Mandi, H.P.
        (hereinafter referred to as second party), on this 25th day of





        July, 2017 on the following terms:

        1. That both the parties have settled their disputes amicably
           without any undue influence, coercion and fraud for the





           reasons that they are neighbourer to each other.

        2. That Smt. Bimla Devi, wife of late Sh. Khayali Ram has
           lodged an FIR No. 199/2015, dated 10.8.2015, registered

           at Police Station, Sarkaghat, District Mandi under 
Sections

           341
, 
323
, 
504
, 
506
 IPC and challan has been put in the
           Court   of   Ld.   Additional     Chief     Judicial     Magistrate,
           Sarkaghat, District Mandi, under 
Sections 341
, 
325
 and



           
504
 IPC against Sh. Parhalad Chand (second party) and is
           fixed for hearing on 16.9.2017.



        3. That the second party has also filed a private complaint No.
           19 of 2015 titled as Parhalad Chand vs. Bimla Devi and





           others, in the Court of Ld. Additional Chief Judicial
           Magistrate, Sarkaghat, District Mandi, under 
Sections 323
,





           
452
, 
504
, 
506
 read with 
Section 34
 of IPC against the first
           party. The first party has approached this Hon'ble High
           Court for quashing the summons issued in the aforesaid
           complaint.

        4. That both the parties have agreed in principle to
           compromise all the disputes between themselves amicably
           and agreed not to pursue FIR and consequent proceedings
           thereto and complaint filed against each other. Both the
           parties are having no objection in case the FIR No.
           199/2015, dated 10.8.2015 and subsequent proceedings
           titled as State of H.P. vs. Parhalad Chand pending in the
           Court of Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Sarkaghat,
           and Criminal Complaint No. 19/2015 titled as Parhalad
           Chand vs. Bimla Devi and Ors. are quashed in order to
           keep peace, harmony and tranquility between the parties.



                                    ::: Downloaded on - 03/08/2017 23:56:54 :::HCHP


                                            3


                 5. That the first party have agreed to regulate the flow of
                    water of their house through a pipe which will be laid down




                                                                          .

                    beneath the projection (Chajja) of the house of first party





                    and this underground pipe shall be laid down upto common
                    path existing upon the spot and it shall be further extended





                    upto road. Both the parties will make a request to
                    concerned Gram Panchayat to extend the flow of water
                    through pipe/drain from common path to main road. It is





                    pertinent to mention here that all the expenses shall be
                    beared upon by the first party for the construction of
                    aforesaid work and other party shall cooperate.



                 6. That the second party shall lay down a pipe from his house

                    to common chamber in order to channelize the water of his
                    house and shall bear the expenses for this work.

                 7. That both the parties have agreed not to interfere in the



                    possession of each other land and shall not cause any kind
                    of damage or loss in the land as well as house of each




                    other.

                 8. That     the   first       party     shall    complete        the     aforesaid





                    construction of underground pipe by 31st December, 2017
                    at his own expenses whereas second party will duly





                    cooperate with the first party during construction work of
                    underground pipe.

                 9. That Sh. Ramesh Chand, son of late Sh. Khayali Ram, is
                    duly authorized by the representatives namely Smt. Bimla
                    Devi and Smt. Sunita Devi by way of Special Power of
                    Attorney dated 21.7.2017 to compromise all kind of
                    disputes on their behalf and the same is annexed herewith
                    alongwith this compromise deed.

                               Their joint statements will also become a part and
                 parcel of this compromise."



    3.           It would be noticed that as per the compromise deed, the

    matter with regard to criminal cases as mentioned in paras 2 and 3 (supra)

    are also required to be compromised. However, the moot question is

    whether this is permissible in law.



                                                       ::: Downloaded on - 03/08/2017 23:56:54 :::HCHP


                                           4


    4.          This question is no longer res integra in view of the judgment

    laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Narinder Singh & Ors. V.




                                                                    .



    State of Punjab & Anr. JT 2014 (4) SC 573, wherein it was held as under:



                "(I)    Power conferred under 
Section 482
 of the Code is to be





                distinguished from the power which lies in the Court to compound the
                offences under 
Section 320
 of the Code. No doubt, under 
Section 482

                of the Code, the High Court has inherent power to quash the criminal
                proceedings even in those cases which are not compoundable, where





                the parties have settled the matter between themselves. However,
                this power is t to be exercised sparingly and with caution.
                (II)    When the parties have reached the settlement and on that

                basis petition for quashing the criminal proceedings is filed, the

                guiding factor in such cases would be to secure:

                (I) ends of justice, or
                (II) to prevent abuse of the process of any Court.

                While exercising the power the High Court is to form an opinion on



                either of the aforesaid two objectives.

                (III)   Such a power is not be exercised in those prosecutions which




                involve heinous and serious offences of mental depravity or offences
                like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are not private in nature





                and have a serious impact on society. Similarly, for offences alleged
                to have been committed under special statute like the 
Prevention of
                Corruption Act
 or the of offences committed by Public Servants while





                working in that capacity are not to be quashed merely on the basis of
                compromise between the victim and the offender.
                (IV)    On the other, those criminal cases having overwhelmingly and
                pre--dominantly civil character, particularly those arising out of
                commercial transactions or arising out of matrimonial relationship or
                family disputes should be quashed when the parties have resolved
                their entire disputes among themselves.

                (V)     While exercising its powers, the High Court is to examine as
                to whether the possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and
                continuation of criminal cases would put the accused to great
                oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to
                him by not quashing the criminal cases.

                (VI)    Offences under 
Section 307
 IPC would fall in the category of
                heinous and serious offences and therefore is to be generally treated
                as crime against the society and not against the individual alone.
                However, the High Court would not rest its decision merely because
                there is a mention of 
Section 307
 IPC in the FIR or the charge is
                framed under this provision. It would be open to the High Court to





                                                 ::: Downloaded on - 03/08/2017 23:56:54 :::HCHP


                                  5





        examine as to whether incorporation of 
Section 307
 IPC is there for
        the sake of it or the prosecution has collected sufficient evidence,




                                                             .

        which if proved, would lead to proving the charge under 
Section 307






        IPC. For this purpose, it would be open to the High Court to go by the
        nature of injury sustained, whether such injury is inflicted on the
        vital/delegate parts of the body, nature of weapons used etc. Medical





        report in respect of injuries suffered by the victim can generally be the
        guiding factor. On the basis of this prima facie analysis, the High
        Court can examine as to whether there is a strong possibility of





        conviction or the chances of conviction are remote and bleak. In the
        former case it can refuse to accept the settlement and quash the
        criminal proceedings whereas in the later case it would be
        permissible for the High Court to accept the plea compounding the

        offence based on complete settlement between the parties. At this

        stage, the Court can also be swayed by the fact that the settlement
        between the parties is going to result in harmony between them which
        may improve their future relationship.



        (VII)   While deciding whether to exercise its power under Section
        482 of the Code or not, timings of settlement play a crucial role.
        Those cases where the settlement is arrived at immediately after the




        alleged commission of offence and the matter is still under
        investigation, the High Court may be liberal in accepting the





        settlement to quash the criminal proceedings/investigation. It is
        because of the reason that at this stage the investigation is still on





        and even the charge sheet has not been filed. Likewise, those cases
        where the charge is framed but the evidence is yet to start or the
        evidence is still at infancy stage, the High Court can show
        benevolence in exercising its powers favourably, but after prima facie
        assessment of the circumstances/material mentioned above. On the
        other hand, where the prosecution evidence is almost complete or
        after the conclusion of the evidence the matter is at the stage of
        argument, normally the High Court should refrain from exercising its
        power under Section 482 of the Code, as in such cases the trial court
        would be in a position to decide the case finally on merits and to
        come a conclusion as to whether the offence under 
Section 307
 IPC
        is committed or not. Similarly, in those cases where the conviction is
        already recorded by the trial court and the matter is at the appellate
        stage before the High Court, mere compromise between the parties
        would not be a ground to accept the same resulting in acquittal of the
        offender who has already been convicted by the trial court. Here
        charge is proved under 
Section 307
 IPC and conviction is already
        recorded of a heinous crime and, therefore, there is no question of
        sparing a convict found guilty of such a crime."



                                         ::: Downloaded on - 03/08/2017 23:56:54 :::HCHP


                                       6


    5.          It would be seen that prior to Narinder Singh's case (supra),




                                                                .



 
a three Hon'ble Judges Bench had considered the relevant scope of

    
Section 482
 and 
320
 Cr.P.C. in 
Gian Singh versus State of Punjab and





    another
 (2012) 10 SCC 303 wherein it was held that power of the High

    Court in quashing of the criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint in

    exercise of its inherent power is distinct and different from the power of a




    Criminal Court for compounding offences under 
Section 320
 Cr.P.C. While

    exercising inherent power of quashment under 
Section 482
 Cr.P.C., the


    Court must have due regard to the nature and gravity of the crime and its

    social impact. It warned the Courts, the High Court for quashing

    proceedings in heinous and serious offences of mental depravity, murder,



    rape, dacoity etc.
 
which principles have been reported and reaffirmed in




    
Narinder Singh
's case (supra).




 
6.          Now the further question remains whether this Court can

    quash the FIR where the petitioners have been charged under Sections





    341, 323, 504, 506, 452 read with 
Section 34
 IPC. This question need not

    detained this Court no longer in view of the judgment of the Hon'ble

    Supreme Court in Dimpey Gujral, W/o 
Vivek Gujral and others versus

    Union Territory
 through Administrator, UT, Chandigarh and others

    (2013) 11 SCC 497 wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court seized of a case

    seeking quashment of FIR and its consequential proceedings wherein the

    accused had been charged under 
Sections 147
, 
148
, 
149
, 
323
, 
307
, 
452


    and 
506
 IPC and the Hon'ble Supreme Court after relying upon the

    judgment of 
Gian Singh
's case (supra) held as follows:-




                "7. In certain decisions of this court in view of the settlement
                arrived at by the parties, this court quashed the FIRs though
                some of the offences were non-compoundable. A two Judges'





                                             ::: Downloaded on - 03/08/2017 23:56:54 :::HCHP


                                 7





        Bench of this court doubted the correctness of those decisions.
        Learned Judges felt that in those decisions, this court had




                                                               .

        permitted compounding of non-compoundable offences. The





        said issue was, therefore, referred to a larger bench.



 
The larger Bench in 
Gian Singh v. State of Punjab
 (2012) 10





        SCC 303 considered the relevant provisions of the Code and
        the judgments of this court and concluded as under: (SCC
        pp.342-43, para 61)



            r             to
              "61. The position that emerges from the above
              discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
              High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or

              complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct
              and different from the power given to a criminal court for
              compounding the offences under Section 320 of the
              Code. Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no



              statutory limitation but it has to be exercised in accord
              with the guideline engrafted in such power viz; (i) to




              secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the
              process of any Court. In what cases power to quash the





              criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R may be
              exercised where the offender and victim have settled





              their   dispute       would     depend       on     the    facts    and
              circumstances of each case and no category can be
              prescribed. However, before exercise of such power, the
              High Court must have due regard to the nature and
              gravity of the crime. Heinous and serious offences of
              mental depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity,
              etc. cannot be fittingly quashed even though the victim or
              victim's family and the offender have settled the dispute.
              Such offences are not private in nature and have serious
              impact on society. Similarly, any compromise between
              the victim and offender in relation to the offences under
              special statutes like 
Prevention of Corruption Act
 or the
              offences committed by public servants while working in
              that capacity etc; cannot provide for any basis for
              quashing criminal proceedings involving such offences.
              But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and pre-
              dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for the





                                            ::: Downloaded on - 03/08/2017 23:56:54 :::HCHP


                               8





              purposes of quashing, particularly the offences arising
              from commercial, financial, mercantile, civil, partnership




                                                         .


              or such like transactions or the offences arising out of





              matrimony relating to dowry, etc. or the family disputes
              where the wrong is basically private or personal in nature





              and the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this
              category of cases, the High Court may quash criminal
              proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise
              between the offender and victim, the possibility of





              conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of
              criminal case would put accused to great oppression and
              prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him

              by not quashing the criminal case despite full and

              complete settlement and compromise with the victim. In
              other words, the High Court must consider whether it
              would be unfair or contrary to the interest of justice to


              continue with the criminal proceeding or continuation of
              the criminal proceeding would tantamount to abuse of




              process of law despite settlement and compromise
              between the victim and wrongdoer and whether to





              secure the ends of justice, it is appropriate that criminal
              case is put to an end and if the answer to the above





              question(s) is in affirmative, the High Court shall be well
              within its jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceeding."



                                                   (emphasis supplied)


        8. In the light of the above observations of this court in Gian
        Singh, we feel that this is a case where the continuation of
        criminal proceedings would tantamount to abuse of process of
        law because the alleged offences are not heinous offences
        showing extreme depravity nor are they against the society.
        They are offences of a personal nature and burying them would
        bring about peace and amity between the two sides. In the
        circumstances of the case, FIR No.163 dated 26/10/2006
        registered under 
Section 147
, 
148
,
149
, 
323
, 
307
, 
452
 and 
506

        of the IPC at Police Station Sector 3,Chandigarh and all
        consequential proceedings arising there from including the final
        report presented under Section 173 of the Code and charges
        framed by the trial court are hereby quashed."



                                      ::: Downloaded on - 03/08/2017 23:56:54 :::HCHP


                                         9


    7.             On the basis of the aforesaid exposition of law, this Court is of

    the opinion that this is a case where the continuation of the criminal




                                                                  .



    proceedings would tantamount to abuse of process of law because the

    alleged offences are not heinous offences showing extreme depravity nor





    are they against the society. They are offences of personal nature and

    quashing FIR and proceedings would bring out peace between two sides.



    8.       In these circumstances, FIR No. 199/2015, dated 10.8.2015,

    registered at Police Station, Sarkaghat, District Mandi under 
Sections 341
,

    
323
, 
504
, 
506
 IPC by Smt. Bimla Devi( petitioner herein) against the

    respondent No.2 (herein) and criminal case pending in the Court of Ld.

    Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Sarkaghat, District Mandi, under


    
Sections 341
, 
325
 and 
504
 IPC and private complaint No. 19 of 2015 titled

    as Parhalad Chand vs. Bimla Devi and others, pending in the Court of Ld.




    Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Sarkaghat, District Mandi, under





    Sections 323, 452, 504, 506 read with 
Section 34
 of IPC against Smt.

    Bimla Devi and others, are quashed. Resultantly, all the consequential





    proceedings emanating from the aforesaid FIR and private complaint are

    also quashed.



    9.             The petition is disposed of in the aforesaid terms, so also

    the pending application(s) if any. The parties are left to bear their own

    costs.



    10.            However, before parting, the Court places on record its

    gratitude for the valuable assistance rendered by learned Mediator Shri

    S.C. Sharma, Advocate in bringing the aforesaid compromise between

    the parties.



    August 1, 2017.                              (Tarlok Singh Chauhan),
    (GR)                                                    Judge.





                                               ::: Downloaded on - 03/08/2017 23:56:54 :::HCHP