[Cites 
18
, Cited by 
2
]




Himachal Pradesh High Court


Lekh Ram & Others vs State Of Himachal Pradesh And Another on 1 December, 2022


Author: 
Sandeep Sharma


Bench: 
Sandeep Sharma


         IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH, SHIMLA.

                                         CrMMO No. 1087 of 2022
                                           Decided on: 1.12.2022
       ________________________________________________________




                                                                                .
    Lekh Ram & others                                 ...Petitioners





                                  Versus
    State of Himachal Pradesh and another          ....Respondents
       ________________________________________________________
    Coram:





    Hon'ble Mr. Justice Sandeep Sharma, Judge.
    Whether approved for reporting? 1No.
       ________________________________________________________

    For the Petitioner                     :      Mr. H. S. Rangra, Advocate.





    For the Respondents                    :      Mr. Narinder Guleria, Additional
                                                  Advocate    General with      Ms.
                                                  Svaneel Jaswal, Deputy Advocate
                                                  General, for respondent No.1.

                                     Mr. Vivek Sharma, Advocate, for

                                     respondent no.2.
           ________________________________________________________

    Sandeep Sharma, Judge (oral):



                        By way of instant petition filed under 
Section 482


    CrPC, prayer has been made on behalf of the petitioners for




    quashing of FIR No. 57 of 2016 dated 24.2.2016, registered at





    Police Station Balh District Mandi, Himachal Pradesh under

    
Sections 447
, 
379
, 506 and 
Section 34
 of IPC against the





    petitioners alongwith consequential proceedings, on the basis of

    compromise arrived inter se parties.



    2.                  Precisely, the facts of the case, as emerge from the

    record, are that the FIR sought to be quashed in the instant

    proceedings, came to be lodged at the behest of respondent



    1

        Whether the reporters of the local papers may be allowed to see the judgment?



                                                              ::: Downloaded on - 03/12/2022 20:32:09 :::CIS


                                     2


    No.2/complainant (hereinafter, 'complainant') who alleged that

    on 8.2.2016 at 6.00 pm, petitioner unauthorizedly entered in

    her land and uprooted the boundary polls.          The complainant




                                                            .



    also alleged that she tried to stop the petitioners from doing this

    unlawful act but the petitioners not only extended threats to her





    but also caused damage to her property. Though, after

    completion of investigation, police has presented the Challan in

    the competent court of law but before the same could be taken





    to its logical end, parties have entered into compromise, whereby

    they have resolved to settle the dispute inter se them amicably.



    In the aforesaid background, petitioners have approached this

    court in the instant proceedings for quashing of FIR alongwith

    consequential proceedings pending in the competent court of

    law.



    3.          Vide order dated 17.11.2022, this court while

    directing respondent-State to verify the factum with regard to




    compromise, if any, arrived inter se parties, also deemed it





    necessary to cause presence of respondent No.2, at whose

    instance, FIR sought to be quashed in the instant proceedings,





    came to be lodged so that the correctness and genuineness of

    the compromise could be ascertained.



    4.          Though, reply of the respondent-State has been filed

    but the same is not on record. Registry is directed to trace and

    place the same on record.       Photocopy of status report/reply

    nowhere reveals the factum with regard to compromise, if any,





                                           ::: Downloaded on - 03/12/2022 20:32:09 :::CIS


                                        3




    arrived inter se parties, however, respondent No.2/complainant,

    at whose instance FIR sought to be quashed, came to be lodged,

    has come present in the court, who is duly represented by Mr.




                                                               .



    Vivek Sharma, Advocate. Respondent No.2 states on oath that

    she of her own volition and without there being any external





    pressure has entered into compromise with the petitioners,

    whereby they have resolved        to settle the dispute inter se them

    amicably. She states that the FIR sought to be quashed is result





    of misunderstanding and otherwise also the petitioners have

    apologized   for
                 r     the   damage    caused    to   her     property      and

    compensated her for the same, as such, she shall have no

    objection in case, prayer made on behalf of the petitioners for

    quashing of FIR alongwith consequential proceedings is allowed

    and petitioners are acquitted of the charges framed against



    them. While admitting contents of the compromise to be correct,

    she also admits her signatures thereupon.



    5.           Mr. Narender Guleria, learned Additional Advocate





    General, after having heard the statement made by respondent

    No.2, states that no fruitful purpose will be served in case FIR as





    well consequent proceedings against the petitioner are allowed to

    sustain. He further states that otherwise also, chances of

    conviction of petitioners are remote and bleak on account of

    statement made by respondent No. 2, as such, State shall have

    no objection, in case prayer made in the instant petition for





                                              ::: Downloaded on - 03/12/2022 20:32:09 :::CIS


                                     4




    quashment of FIR alongwith consequential proceedings, is

    accepted.



    6.          The question which now needs consideration is




                                                            .



 
whether FIR in question can be ordered to be quashed when

    Hon'ble Apex Court in 
Narinder Singh and others versus State





    of Punjab and another
 (2014)6 SCC 466 has specifically held

    that power under
 S. 482
 CrPC is not to be exercised in the cases

    which involve heinous and serious offences of mental depravity





    or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are not

    private in nature and have a serious impact on society.




 
7.          At this stage, it would be relevant to take note of the

    judgment passed by Hon'ble Apex Court in 
Narinder Singh


    (supra), whereby the Hon'ble Apex Court has formulated

    guidelines for accepting the settlement and quashing the



    proceedings or refusing to accept the settlement with direction to

    continue with the criminal proceedings. Perusal of judgment




    
referred to above
 clearly depicts that in para 29.1, Hon'ble Apex





    Court has returned the findings that power conferred under

    
Section 482
 of the Code is to be distinguished from the power





    which lies in the Court to compound the offences under 
Section

    320
 of the Code. No doubt, under 
Section 482
 of the Code, the

    High Court has inherent power to quash criminal proceedings

    even in those cases which are not compoundable and where the

    parties have settled the matter between themselves, however,





                                           ::: Downloaded on - 03/12/2022 20:32:09 :::CIS


                                     5




    this power is to be exercised sparingly and with great caution.




    Para Nos. 29 to 29.7 of the judgment are reproduced as under:-



               "29. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we sum




                                                             .

               up and lay down the following principles by which





               the High Court would be guided in giving adequate
               treatment to the settlement between the parties
               and exercising its power under 
Section 482
 of the
               Code while accepting the settlement and quashing





               the proceedings or refusing to accept the
               settlement with direction to continue with the
               criminal proceedings:

               29.1 Power conferred under 
Section 482
 of the
               Code is to be distinguished from the power which





               lies in the Court to compound the offences under
               
Section 320
 of the Code. No doubt, under 
Section
               482
 of the Code, the High Court has inherent
               power to quash the criminal proceedings even in
               those cases which are not compoundable, where

               the parties have settled the matter between
               themselves. However, this power is to be exercised

               sparingly and with caution.

               29.2. When the parties have reached the
               settlement and on that basis petition for quashing
               the criminal proceedings is filed, the guiding factor
               in such cases would be to secure:



               (i) ends of justice, or

               (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any Court.

               While exercising the power under 
Section 482

               Cr.P.C the High Court is to form an opinion on




               either of the aforesaid two objectives.
               29.3. Such a power is not be exercised in those





               prosecutions which involve heinous and serious
               offences of mental depravity or offences like
               murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are not
               private in nature and have a serious impact on





               society. Similarly, for offences alleged to have been
               committed under special statute like the 
Prevention
               of Corruption Act
 or the offences committed by
               Public Servants while working in that capacity are
               not to be quashed merely on the basis of
               compromise between the victim and the offender.
               29.4. On the other, those criminal cases having
               overwhelmingly         and    pre-dominantly      civil
               character, particularly those arising out of
               commercial transactions or arising out of
               matrimonial relationship or family disputes should





                                            ::: Downloaded on - 03/12/2022 20:32:09 :::CIS


                             6




        be quashed when the parties have resolved their
        entire disputes among themselves.

        29.5. While exercising its powers, the High Court is
        to examine as to whether the possibility of
        conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of




                                                    .

        criminal cases would put the accused to great





        oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice
        would be caused to him by not quashing the
        criminal cases.

        29.6. Offences under 
Section 307
 IPC would fall in





        the category of heinous and serious offences and
        therefore is to be generally treated as crime
        against the society and not against the individual
        alone. However, the High Court would not rest its
        decision merely because there is a mention of





        
Section 307
 IPC in the FIR or the charge is framed
        under this provision. It would be open to the High
        Court to examine as to whether incorporation of
        
Section 307
 IPC is there for the sake of it or the
        prosecution has collected sufficient evidence,

        which if proved, would lead to proving the charge
        under 
Section 307
 IPC. For this purpose, it would

        be open to the High Court to go by the nature of
        injury sustained, whether such injury is inflicted
        on the vital/delegate parts of the body, nature of
        weapons used etc. Medical report in respect of
        injuries suffered by the victim can generally be the


        guiding factor. On the basis of this prima facie
        analysis, the High Court can examine as to
        whether there is a strong possibility of conviction
        or the chances of conviction are remote and bleak.



        In the former case it can refuse to accept the
        settlement and quash the criminal proceedings





        whereas in the later case it would be permissible
        for the High Court to accept the plea compounding
        the offence based on complete settlement between
        the parties. At this stage, the Court can also be





        swayed by the fact that the settlement between
        the parties is going to result in harmony between
        them which may improve their future relationship.
        29.7. While deciding whether to exercise its power
        under Section 482 of the Code or not, timings of
        settlement play a crucial role. Those cases where
        the settlement is arrived at immediately after the
        alleged commission of offence and the matter is
        still under investigation, the High Court may be
        liberal in accepting the settlement to quash the
        criminal proceedings/investigation. It is because of
        the reason that at this stage the investigation is





                                   ::: Downloaded on - 03/12/2022 20:32:09 :::CIS


                                     7




                still on and even the charge sheet has not been
                filed. Likewise, those cases where the charge is
                framed but the evidence is yet to start or the
                evidence is still at infancy stage, the High Court
                can show benevolence in exercising its powers




                                                            .

                favourably, but after prima facie assessment of the





                circumstances/material mentioned above. On the
                other hand, where the prosecution evidence is
                almost complete or after the conclusion of the
                evidence the matter is at the stage of argument,





                normally the High Court should refrain from
                exercising its power under Section 482 of the Code,
                as in such cases the trial court would be in a
                position to decide the case finally on merits and to
                come a conclusion as to whether the offence under





                
Section 307
 IPC is committed or not. Similarly, in
                those cases where the conviction is already
                recorded by the trial court and the matter is at the
                appellate stage before the High Court, mere
                compromise between the parties would not be a

                ground to accept the same resulting in acquittal of
                the offender who has already been convicted by

                the trial court. Here charge is proved under 
Section
                307
 IPC and conviction is already recorded of a
                heinous crime and, therefore, there is no question
                of sparing a convict found guilty of such a crime".



    8.          Careful perusal of para 29.3 of the judgment

    suggests that such a power is not to be exercised in the cases




    which involve heinous and serious offences of mental depravity





    or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are not

    private in nature and have a serious impact on society. Apart





    from this, offences committed under special statute like the

    
Prevention of Corruption Act
 or the offences committed by Public

    Servants while working in that capacity are not to be quashed

    merely on the basis of compromise between the victim and the

    offender.   On the other hand, those criminal cases having

    overwhelmingly and predominantly civil character, particularly





                                           ::: Downloaded on - 03/12/2022 20:32:09 :::CIS


                                      8




    arising out of commercial transactions or arising out of

    matrimonial relationship or family disputes may be quashed

    when the parties have resolved their entire disputes among




                                                             .



    themselves.



 
9.            The Hon'ble Apex Court in case 
Gian Singh v. State





    of Punjab
 and anr. (2012) 10 SCC 303 has held that power of

    the High Court in quashing of the criminal proceedings or FIR or

    complaint in exercise of its inherent power is distinct and





    different from the power of a Criminal Court for compounding

    offences under 
Section 320
 Cr.PC. Even in the judgment passed

    in 
Narinder Singh
's case, the Hon'ble Apex Court has held that

    while exercising inherent power of quashment under 
Section 482


    Cr.PC the Court must have due regard to the nature and gravity

    of the crime and its social impact and it cautioned the Courts



    not to exercise the power for quashing proceedings in heinous

    and serious offences of mental depravity, murder, rape, dacoity




    etc.
 However subsequently, the Hon'ble Apex Court in Dimpey





    Gujral and Ors. vs. Union Territory through Administrator,

    UT, Chandigarh and Ors. (2013( 11 SCC 497 has also held as





    under:-



                  "7. In certain decisions of this Court in view of the
                  settlement arrived at by the parties, this Court
                  quashed the FIRs though some of the offences were
                  non-compoundable. A two Judges' Bench of this
                  court doubted the correctness of those decisions.
                  Learned Judges felt that in those decisions, this
                  court had permitted compounding of non-
                  compoundable offences.         The said issue was,
                  therefore, referred to a larger bench.



                                            ::: Downloaded on - 03/12/2022 20:32:09 :::CIS


                             9


 
The larger Bench in 
Gian Singh v. State of Punjab

        (2012) 10 SCC 303 considered the relevant
        provisions of the Code and the judgments of this
        court and concluded as under: (SCC pp. 342-43,
        para 61)




                                                    .


        61. The position that emerges from the above





        discussion can be summarised thus: the power of
        the High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or
        FIR or complaint in exercise of its inherent
        jurisdiction is distinct and different from the power





        given to a criminal court for compounding the
        offences under Section 320 of the Code. Inherent
        power is of wide plenitude with no statutory
        limitation but it has to be exercised in accord with
        the guideline engrafted in such power viz; (i) to





        secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of
        the process of any Court. In what cases power to
        quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R
        may be exercised where the offender and victim
        have settled their dispute would depend on the facts

        and circumstances of each case and no category can
        be prescribed. However, before exercise of such

        power, the High Court must have due regard to the
        nature and gravity of the crime. Heinous and serious
        offences of mental depravity or offences like murder,
        rape, dacoity, etc. cannot be fittingly quashed even
        though the victim or victim's family and the offender


        have settled the dispute. Such offences are not
        private in nature and have serious impact on society.
        Similarly, any compromise between the victim and
        offender in relation to the offences under special




        statutes like 
Prevention of Corruption Act
 or the
        offences committed by public servants while working





        in that capacity etc; cannot provide for any basis for
        quashing criminal proceedings involving such
        offences.    But     the   criminal    cases    having
        overwhelmingly and pre-dominatingly civil flavour





        stand on different footing for the purposes of
        quashing, particularly the offences arising from
        commercial, financial, mercantile, civil, partnership
        or such like transactions or the offences arising out
        of matrimony relating to dowry, etc. or the family
        disputes where the wrong is basically private or
        personal in nature and the parties have resolved
        their entire dispute. In this category of cases, High
        Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its view,
        because of the compromise between the offender and
        victim, the possibility of conviction is remote and
        bleak and continuation of criminal case would put





                                   ::: Downloaded on - 03/12/2022 20:32:09 :::CIS


                                          10




                     accused to great oppression and prejudice and
                     extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
                     quashing the criminal case despite full and complete
                     settlement and compromise with the victim. In other
                     words, the High Court must consider whether it




                                                                  .

                     would be unfair or contrary to the interest of justice





                     to continue with the criminal proceeding or
                     continuation of the criminal proceeding would
                     tantamount to abuse of process of law despite
                     settlement and compromise between the victim and





                     wrongdoer and whether to secure the ends of justice,
                     it is appropriate that criminal case is put to an end
                     and if the answer to the above question(s) is in
                     affirmative, the High Court shall be well within its
                     jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceeding."



                     (emphasis supplied)

                     8. In the light of the above observations of this court
                     in Gian Singh, we feel that this is a case where the
                     continuation     of    criminal  proceedings     would
                     tantamount to abuse of process of law because the
                   r alleged offences are not heinous offences showing
                     extreme depravity nor are they against the society.



                     They are offences of a personal nature and burying
                     them would bring about peace and amity between
                     the two sides. In the circumstances of the case, FIR
                     No. 163 dated 26.10.2006 registered under 
Section
                     147
, 
148
, 
149
, 
323
, 
307
, 
452
 and 
506
 of the IPC at


                     Police Station Sector 3, Chandigarh and all
                     consequential proceedings arising there from
                     including the final report presented under Section
                     173 of the Code and charges framed by the trial




                     Court are hereby quashed."



 
10.              Hon'ble Apex Court in its judgment dated 4th

    October, 2017, titled as 
Parbatbhai Aahir @ Parbatbhai





    Bhimsinhbhai Karmur and others versus State of Gujarat and

    Another
, passed in Criminal Appeal No.1723 of 2017 arising out

    of    SLP(Crl)     No.9549    of   2016,   reiterated     the    principles/

    parameters 
laid down in
 
Narinder Singh
's case supra for

    accepting the settlement and quashing the proceedings. It would





                                                 ::: Downloaded on - 03/12/2022 20:32:09 :::CIS


                                    11




    be profitable to reproduce para No. 13 to 15 of the judgment

    herein:




               "13. The same principle was followed in Central




                                                            .

 
Bureau of Investigation v. Maninder Singh
 (2016)1





               SCC 389 by a bench of two learned Judges of this
               Court. In that case, the High Court had, in the
               exercise of its inherent power under Section 482
               quashed proceedings under Sections 420, 467, 468





               and 471 read with Section 120-B of the Penal Code.
               While allowing the appeal filed by the Central
               Bureau of Investigation Mr Justice Dipak Misra (as
               the learned Chief Justice then was) observed that
               the case involved allegations of forgery of documents





               to embezzle the funds of the bank. In such a
               situation, the fact that the dispute had been settled
               with the bank would not justify a recourse to
               thepower under Section 482:


               "...In economic offences Court must not only keep in

               view that money has been paid to the bank which
               has been defrauded but also the society at large. It is

               not a case of simple assault or a theft of a trivial
               amount; but the offence with which we are
               concerned is well planned and was committed with a
               deliberate design with an eye of personal profit
               regardless of consequence to the society at large. To


               quash the proceeding merely on the ground that the
               accused has settled the amount with the bank would
               be a misplaced sympathy. If the prosecution against
               the economic offenders are not allowed to continue,




               the entire community is aggrieved."

               14. In a subsequent decision in State of Tamil Nadu





               v R Vasanthi Stanley (2016) 1 SCC 376, the court
               rejected the submission that the first respondent was
               a woman "who was following the command of her
               husband" and had signed certain documents without





               being aware of the nature of the fraud which was
               being perpetrated on the bank. Rejecting the
               submission, this Court held that:

               "... Lack of awareness, knowledge or intent is neither
               to be considered nor accepted in economic offences.
               The submission assiduously presented on gender
               leaves us unimpressed. An offence under the
               criminal law is an offence and it does not depend
               upon the gender of an accused. True it is, there are
               certain provisions in 
Code of Criminal Procedure

               relating to exercise of jurisdiction Under Section 437,
               etc. therein but that altogether pertains to a different





                                           ::: Downloaded on - 03/12/2022 20:32:09 :::CIS


                             12




        sphere. A person committing a murder or getting
        involved in a financial scam or forgery of documents,
        cannot claim discharge or acquittal on the ground of
        her gender as that is neither constitutionally nor
        statutorily a valid argument. The offence is gender




                                                     .

        neutral in this case. We say no more on this score..."



        "...A grave criminal offence or serious economic
        offence or for that matter the offence that has the
        potentiality to create a dent in the financial health of





        the institutions, is not to be quashed on the ground
        that there is delay in trial or the principle that when
        the matter has been settled it should be quashed to
        avoid the load on the system..."



        15. The broad principles which emerge from the
        precedents on the subject may be summarized in the
        following propositions:

        (i) Section 482 preserves the inherent powers of the
        High Court to prevent an abuse of the process of any

        court or to secure the ends of justice. The provision
        does not confer new powers. It only recognizes and

        preserves powers which inhere in the High Court;

        (ii) The invocation of the jurisdiction of the High Court
        to quash a First Information Report or a criminal
        proceeding on the ground that a settlement has been
        arrived at between the offender and the victim is not


        the same as the invocation of jurisdiction for the
        purpose of compounding an offence. While
        compounding an offence, the power of the court is
        governed by the provisions of 
Section 320
 of the




        Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. The power to
        quash under Section 482 is attracted even if the





        offence is non-compoundable.

        (iii) In forming an opinion whether a criminal
        proceeding or complaint should be quashed in
        exercise of its jurisdiction under Section 482, the





        High Court must evaluate whether the ends of justice
        would justify the exercise of the inherent power;

        (iv) While the inherent power of the High Court has a
        wide ambit and plenitude it has to be exercised; (i) to
        secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent an abuse
        of the process of any court;

        (v) The decision as to whether a complaint or First
        Information Report should be quashed on the ground
        that the offender and victim have settled the dispute,
        revolves ultimately on the facts and circumstances of
        each case and no exhaustive elaboration of
        principles can be formulated;



                                    ::: Downloaded on - 03/12/2022 20:32:09 :::CIS


                                     13


                vi) In the exercise of the power under Section 482
                and while dealing with a plea that the dispute has
                been settled, the High Court must have due regard to
                the nature and gravity of the offence. Heinous and




                                                             .

                serious offences involving mental depravity or





                offences such as murder, rape and dacoity cannot
                appropriately be quashed though the victim or the
                family of the victim have settled the dispute. Such
                offences are, truly speaking, not private in nature but





                have a serious impact upon society. The decision to
                continue with the trial in such cases is founded on
                the overriding element of public interest in punishing
                persons for serious offences;

                (vii) As distinguished from serious offences, there





                may be criminal cases which have an overwhelming
                or predominant element of a civil dispute. They stand
                on a distinct footing in so far as the exercise of the
                inherent power to quash is concerned;

                (viii) Criminal cases involving offences which arise

                from commercial, financial, mercantile, partnership or
                similar transactions with an essentially civil flavour

                may in appropriate situations fall for quashing where
                parties have settled the dispute;

                (ix) In such a case, the High Court may quash the
                criminal proceeding if in view of the compromise
                between the disputants, the possibility of a


                conviction is remote and the continuation of a
                criminal proceeding would cause oppression and
                prejudice; and

                (x) There is yet an exception to the principle set out in




                propositions (viii) and (ix) above. Economic offences
                involving the financial and economic well-being of the





                state have implications which lie beyond the domain
                of a mere dispute between private disputants. The
                High Court would be justified in declining to quash
                where the offender is involved in an activity akin to a





                financial or economic fraud or misdemeanour. The
                consequences of the act complained of upon the
                financial or economic system will weigh in the
                balance."



    11.         In the case at hand, the offences alleged to have

    been committed by the accused do not pertain to offence of

    moral turpitude or heinous offences rather the offence alleged to

    have been committed is a petty offence and more over





                                            ::: Downloaded on - 03/12/2022 20:32:09 :::CIS


                                    14




    compromise has been arrived at inter se parties, as such, no

    fruitful purpose would be served in continuing with criminal

    prosecution of the petitioners, more so when the complainant




                                                           .



    has compromised the matter with the accused and she is also

    no more interested in pursuing the case further. Otherwise also,





    there are bleak and remote chances of conviction of accused and

    as such, this court sees no impediment in accepting the prayer

    made by petitioners for quashing of FIR.



    12.         Consequently, in view of the aforesaid discussion as

    well as law laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court (supra), FIR No.

    57 of 2016 dated 24.2.2016, registered at Police Station Balh

    District Mandi, Himachal Pradesh under Sections 447, 379, 506

    and 
Section 34
 of IPC alongwith consequential proceedings,

    pending in the court of learned Judicial Magistrate First Class,



    Court No. 3, Mandi, District Mandi, H.P. is quashed and set

    aside. Petitioners are acquitted of the charges framed against




    them in the said FIR/proceedings.



          The petition stands disposed of in the aforesaid terms,

    alongwith all pending applications.



                                               (Sandeep Sharma)
                                                    Judge
    1st December, 2022
          (kck)





                                          ::: Downloaded on - 03/12/2022 20:32:09 :::CIS


                                    15


                                        Cr.MMO No. 1087 of 2022


                Statement of Ms. Neel Pathak D/o Prakash Pathak,
                resident of village Lunapani, P.O. Bhangrotu, Tehsil
                Balh, district Mandi, H.P.




                                                           .



                                        On oath:

                                  1st December, 2022

                Stated that I have come present in the court of my





    own volition and without there being any external pressure. FIR

    No. 57 of 2016 dated 24.2.2016 was registered at Police Station





    Balh District Mandi, Himachal Pradesh under Sections 447,

    379, 506 and 
Section 34
 of IPC against the petitioners at my

    behest. Now we have compromised the matter and petitioners

    have apologized for their behaviour and have undertaken not to

    repeat such acts in future and have compensated me for the

    damage caused to my property, as such, I shall have no


    objection in case aforesaid      FIR alongwith       consequential

    proceedings pending in the court of learned Judicial Magistrate




    First Class, Court No.3, Mandi, District Mandi, H.P. is quashed





    and set aside and petitioners are acquitted of the offences

    framed against them in the FIR. Annexure P-2 bears my





    signatures. I am making this statement, without any fear,

    coercion or threat.



    RO    &     AC                             (Sandeep Sharma)
                                                    Judge

    1st December, 2022
         (kck)





                                          ::: Downloaded on - 03/12/2022 20:32:09 :::CIS