[Cites 
113
, Cited by 
54
]




Supreme Court of India


Shatrughna Baban Meshram vs The State Of Maharashtra on 2 November, 2020


Author: 
Uday Umesh Lalit


Bench: 
Uday Umesh Lalit
, 
Vineet Saran
, 
S. Ravindra Bhat


                                                                                                            1
                                                                                           REPORTABLE
                                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                             CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                            CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.763-764 OF 2016



                          SHATRUGHNA BABAN MESHRAM                                             …Appellant

                                                               VERSUS

                          STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                                             …Respondent



                                                            JUDGMENT



                          Uday Umesh Lalit, J.





                          1.        These appeals by Special Leave challenge the common judgment

                          and order dated 12.10.2015 passed by the High Court in Criminal Appeal

                          No.321 of 2015 and Criminal Confirmation Case No.1 of 2015 affirming

                          the judgment and order dated 14.08.2015 passed by the Trial Court  in

                          Special Case (POCSO Act) No.11 of 2013 and confirming the Death

                          Sentence awarded to the Appellant on two counts i.e. under 
Section 302
 of

                          the Indian Penal Code (
IPC
, for short) and under 
Section 376A
 of IPC.

Signature Not Verified


Digitally signed by Dr.


Mukesh Nasa


Date: 2020.11.03


17:55:07 IST


Reason:


                              The High Court of Judicature at Bombay, Nagpur Bench, Nagpur.
                              The Additional Sessions Judge, Yavatmal
                              
The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012
.

                                                                           2


2.         The victim in the present case was a girl of two and half years of

age and the First Information Report was lodged at 09.25 p.m. on

11.02.2013 by her father with Parwa Police Station, Yavatmal as under:-


             “By coming to the Police Station, I lodge an oral report
             that since one year I am residing with my family at Zatala.
             I have two daughters and one son. The victim, aged 2
             years is my daughter No.-2. I reside in the neighbourhood
             of my father-in-law.



             This day 11.02.13, as there was a programme of
             Mahaprasad in Duttatraya Temple in the village I had gone
             there for taking meals at about 7.00 p.m. After taking
             meals I returned home at about 7.30 p.m. At that time I did
             not see my daughter Miss XXX at home. Therefore, I
             asked my father-in-law as to where was my daughter. On
             it, he told me, “Shatrughna Baban Meshram, aged 21
             years, resident of Zatala has taken away your daughter
             XXX4 from me saying that he would reach her to you”.
             But Shatrughna did not bring my daughter to me. So I
             searched my daughter in the village. I saw my daughter
             XXX4 and Shatrughna Meshram lying in the new, under
             construction, building of Anganwadi. There was no pant
             on the person of my daughter. It was lying beside. Her
             face was bitten and private parts were swollen. I came out
             with my daughter. In the meantime, Baban Sambhaji
             Meshram, aged 50 years also came there. He took
             Shatrughna to his house. I along with father-in-law and
             Vitthal Ghodam took my daughter in an auto from the
             village to Dr. Jaffar Siddiqui from Kurli. The doctor
             examined her and declared her dead. So we returned
             home.



             Shatrughna Meshram took my daughter XXX4 in the
             building of Anganwadi, committed rape on her inhumanly
             in solitude, bit her on face and lips and committed her
             murder.”



3.         As stated in the FIR, the victim was taken to PW6 Dr. Md. Jaffar

Siddiqui for medical attention but she was already dead and there were

    The identity of the victim is not being disclosed

                                                                          3

marks of bites on her body.         After registration of crime, the inquest

(Exh.15) was conducted which recorded, “– Black and bluish coloured

(contusion) marks are visible on both the cheeks and an injury is visible on

the left cheek. Similarly, both the lips are bitten. An injury measuring 2

Cms. X 3 Cms. X 1 Cms. is visible on the chin”. It also recorded that there

were bite marks on the chest and stomach of the victim apart from signs of

forcible sexual assault.



4.      Soon after the registration of crime, PW13 A.P.I. Pankaj Vanjari

(Police Station In-charge) caused arrest of the Appellant vide Exh.23 and

conducted spot panchnama. At the spot, full pant of the victim, pieces of

flesh and chappals of an adult male were found.



5.      The Appellant was taken to PW7 Dr. Ulhas Digambar Lingawar for

medical examination who found that:-



          “There was injury of abrasion on tip of the glans penis.
          The injury size was 5mm X 3mm. That injury was caused
          within 24 hours. The accused was found capable for
          sexual intercourse.”


        In response to queries by the Investigating Officer said witness had

stated in his opinion Exh 46:-



          “(1) Yes, sign of sexual intercourse within 24 Hrs., was
               present.



          (2) Yes, injury mentioned in certificate can be possible,
              due to sexual intercourse.”

                                                                        4


6.     The Post Mortem on the body of the victim was conducted on


12.02.2013 by a Board of five medical professionals and the Report (Exh.


53) noted:-



          “Evidence of perineal tear with merging of vaginal and
          anal orifice, details mentioned under column No.17 & 21.
          Dried blood and faecal stains over genital and perineal
          region.”


       Following injuries were found on the person of the victim: -



         “1.    Multiple abrasions over right zygomatic region of
                sizes ranging from 0.5 cm x 0.5 cm. to 0.3 cm x 0.2
                cm, reddish.



         2.     Abrasion over left upper eye-lid of size 0.5 cm x 0.5
                cm, reddish.



         3.     Abrasion over right cheek of size 4 cm x 4 cm,
                reddish.



         4.     Abrasion over left cheek of size 8.5 cm x 7 cm,
                reddish.



         5.     Evidence of missing both upper and lower lips
                exposing labial fat with clean cut margins seen
                periorally without blood infiltration (post mortem in
                nature).



         6.     Lacerated wound over chin, midline of size 3 cm x
                3 cm muscle deep with tissue missing, margins
                irregular and blood infiltrated, reddish.



         7.     Bite mark over and around right nipple over a
                region of size 5 cm x 5 cm, margins contused,
                reddish.



         8.     Bite mark over and around left nipple over a region
                of size 3 cm x 3 cm, margins contused, reddish.



         9      Bite mark over abdomen, 1 cm right at the level of
                umbilicus over a region of size 4 cm x 3.5 cm,
                margins contused, reddish.

                                                                                  5


        10.    Bite mark over abdomen in the midline, 5 cm below
               the umbilicus, over a region of size 3 cm x 3 cm,
               margins contused, reddish.



        11.    Bite mark over public region in the midline, 9cm
               below umbilicus, over a region of size 4 cm x 3.5
               cm, margins contused, reddish.



        12.    Bite mark over lateral aspect of right shoulder, over
               a region of size 5 cm x 3 cm, margins contused,
               reddish.



        13.    Bite mark over right buttock, over a region of size 3
               cm x 3 cm, margins contused, reddish.



        14.    Bite mark over right buttock, over a region of size 3
               cm x 3 cm, margins contused, reddish, separated
               from injury No.13 by 1.5 cm.



        15.    Bite mark over right buttock, over a region of size 3
               cm x 2.5 cm, margins contused, reddish separated
               from injury No.14 by 1 cm.



        16.    Bite mark over left buttock, over a region of size
               3.7 cm x 3 cm, margins contused, reddish.



        17.    Multiple lacerations over vaginal and anal region
               merging vaginal and anal orifice (perineal tear at 3,
               6 and 9 O’clock positions), margins irregular, blood
               infiltrated, reddish.



        18.    Abrasion over left knee joint region, on anterior
               aspect, of size 1 cm x 0.5 cm, reddish.



  Note: 1.     Injuries No.1, 2, 3, 4 & 18 are caused by hard and
               rough surface.



        2.     Injury No.5 is caused by sharp edged object.


        3.     Injury No.6 is caused by nibbling by teeth (nibbling
               by bite).



        4.     Injury No.7 to 16 are caused by human bite.


        5.     Injury No.17 is caused by forceful sexual assault.”
       Under   the    heading     “Internal     Injuries”     the      corresponding

observations in Column No.21 were:-

                                                                             6


          “Evidence of tear in the posterior vaginal wall with merging of
          vaginal and anal canal (perineal tear). Surface ragged, margins
          irregular, blood infiltrated and reddish, extending and tearing
          (perforating) the rectum, corresponding to injury No.17 under
          column no.17.”

On the effect of the injuries and the cause of death, the Report stated: -



         “(a) Whether the ante-mortem
              injuries found on the dead       : Yes
              body were sufficient in the
              ordinary course of nature
              to cause death.

          (b) If yes, which of the injuries
              were individually sufficient     Injury No.17 under
              in the ordinary course of        column No.17 with its
              nature of cause death.           corresponding internal

          (c) Which of the injuries            injuries mentioned
              collectively are sufficient in   under column No.21
              the ordinary course of           with its consequences.

              nature to cause death.



          Opinion as to the cause of death : “Shock and haemorrhage
                                             following perineal tear
                                             With multiple injuries”.





7.      The clothes of the victim as well as that of the Appellant were sent

for chemical analysis and the Report (Exh.69) was as under:-

          “_________________________________________
                             Description of Parcel/s

          -- Six sealed parcels, seals intact and as per copy sent.



                   Description of articles contained in Parcels

          1.   Jersey Wrapped in paper labelled – A1

          2.   Full Pant Wrapped in paper labelled – B1

          3.   Full Shirt Wrapped in paper labelled – B2

          4.   Knicker Wrapped in paper labelled – B3

          5.   Full Pant (Small) Wrapped in paper labelled – C1

          6.   Earth Wrapped in paper labelled – C2

                          RESULTS OF ANALYSIS.

          --   Exhibit No.1 has few blood stains ranging from 0.1 to
               4 cm in diameter on upper portion.

                                                                       7


          --   Exhibit 2 has moderate number of blood stains,
               ranging from 0.1 to 2 cm in diameter mostly on front
               portion.

          --   Exhibit No.5 has moderate number of blood stains,
               ranging from 0.1 to 2 cm in diameter on middle and
               lower portion.

          --   No blood is detected on exhibits No.3,4 and 6.

          --   No semen is detected on exhibits No. 1, 2 3, 4 and 5.

          --   Blood detected on exhibits No.1, 2 and 5 is human.”


         Exhibits 1 and 5 referred to in the Report were clothes of the

victim while Exhibits 2, 3 and 4 were that of the Appellant.

7.1     The relevant material including swabs taken from the body of the

victim, the clothes and blood samples were subjected to D.N.A. analysis

and the Report (Exh.54) stated:-



          “Opinion: 1) The DNA profiles obtained from blood
          detected on ex.1 Jersey of deceased, ex.2 Full pant of
          accused, ex.5 full pant of deceased in Bn-677/13, ex.2
          Vaginal swab, ex.3 Vaginal smear slide, ex.4 Cervical
          swab, ex.5 Cervical smear slide, ex.6 Anal swab, ex.7
          Anal smear slide, ex.8 Skin and tissue, ex.12 Swab from
          bite site in Bn-678/13 are identical and from one and the
          same source of female origin and matched with the
          maternal and paternal alleles present in ex.9 Blood of
          deceased xxx in Bn-678/13.”




8.      The Appellant was tried by the Trial Court in Special Case

(POCSO Act) No.11 of 2013 for having committed offences punishable

under 
Sections 376(1)(2)(f)(m)
, 
376A
, 
302
 of IPC and under 
Section 6
 of

the POCSO Act. The Prosecution examined 13 witnesses and produced the

relevant material in support of its case.

                                                                        8



8.1    PW1, the father of the victim proved the First Information Report

and also stated about the examination of the victim by PW6 Dr. Md. Jafar.

PW2, the grandfather of the victim narrated how the Appellant had taken

the victim along with him. It was stated:-



           “He told me that father of the victim had come from work
           and he told him to bring the victim. I told him that the
           victim’s father was yet to come and told him not to take
           the victim with him. But he did not listen me and took
           away the victim. Thereafter myself and my wife went to
           the house of complainant and asked him whether the
           victim was brought to him by accused and he told me that
           the victim was not brought to him. Therefore myself,
           complainant and Shrawan took search of the victim. We
           went towards water tank. One Vikas Masram on inquiry
           told that he saw the accused with the victim going towards
           Anganwadi. Therefore, we went towards Anganwadi. At
           that time the construction of Anganwadi was incomplete
           and we saw that the victim and accused both were lying in
           the premises of Anganwadi. Jins pant of the victim was
           lying aside and T Shirt was on her person. We saw that she
           had sustained bite wounds on her lips, chicks, chest and
           hips. There was bleeding from her private part.”

8.2    PW6 Dr. Md. Jaffar stated that when the victim was brought before

him, she was already dead and had found wounds and bites on her body.



PW7 Dr. Ulhas Digambar Lingawar, deposed about medical examination

of the Appellant and opinion Exh.46.




8.3    PW10 Dr. Sachin Janbaji Gadge, Assistant Professor, Department

of Forensic Medicine, Vasantrao Naik Government Medical College,

Yavatmal proved the Post Mortem Report and stated about injury No.5 as

under: -

                                                                           9


            “7. Injury No.5 can be caused by sharp edged teeth. No
            fracture on external examination or palpation. All injuries
            are ante-mortem and fresh. Except, injury No.5 under
            column No.17 (post-mortem).”



        The nature of injury No.17 and the steps taken after the post mortem

  were indicated thus:-



            “12. Injury No.17 under column No.17 with its
            corresponding internal injury mentioned under column
            No.21 with its consequences is sufficient to cause death in
            ordinary course of nature. Accordingly, the viscera was
            preserved. Vaginal, cervical and anal swabs kept for semen
            analysis. Swabs from bite site and control site kept for
            detection of saliva and comparison. Blood soaked gauzed
            piece kept for D.N.A. Analysis and comparison. Skin and
            tissue kept for D.N.A. Analysis.          Hairs kept for
            comparison, if any. Blood soaked gauzed piece kept for
            blood group. Nail clippings kept for detection of foreign
            blood group. Skin and tissues kept for histopathological
            examination.



            13. Above mentioned material packed, sealed, labled and
            handed over to N.P.C. Ganesh, B.No.215 of P.S. Parwa.

            The receipt of P.C. Ganesh is on Ex.31 on the reverse of
            Ex.35. It bears signature of Dr. R.R. Khetre on the top of
            Ex.35 with endorsement. I know his signature. The
            endorsement is at Ex.52.



            14. My opinion as to cause of death is shock and
            haemorrhage following perineal tear with multiple
            injuries. There was forceful sexual assault on the child.
            The injury No.17 was caused by forceful insertion of
            penis. The post-mortem report bears my signature along
            with signatures of Doctors as named above. Contents are
            correct. It is at Ex.53.”


      In the cross-examination, the witness accepted that it was not

mentioned in the Post Mortem Report that injury No.5 was caused by sharp

edged teeth. The relevant part of the cross-examination was as under:-

            “It is true that the column no.17 note no.2 in respect of
            injury no.5 it is not mentioned that the injury is caused by

                                                                               10

              sharp edged teeth. Witness volunteers that we had sent the
              sample for D.N.A. test. It is true that I had not specifically
              opined in P.M. report that injury No.5 of column no.17
              was caused by sharp edged teeth. It is not true that the
              injury by teeth bite cannot produce clean cut margin.”


8.4         Chandrakant Narayan Bijapwar, a grocery shop owner was

examined as PW9. He stated that at about 7.00 p.m. on 11.02.2013 the

Accused had come to his shop and had purchased Parle Biscuits and

Laxminarayan Chiwada but he could not remember who was with the

Accused at that time. The witness was, therefore, declared hostile.



8.5         The Investigating Officer A.P.I. Pankaj Vanjari was examined as

PW13 and deposed to the steps undertaken during investigation. He

deposed:-



              “On 20-2-2013 I had sent the letter to J.M.F.C. Ghatanji
              for recording the statements
 u/s 164
 of Cr.P.C. of the
              grandfather and Vikas Masram. The letter bears my
              signature. It is at Exh.81. Accordingly I received Exh.17.”


             Exhibit 17 is the statement of the grandfather of the victim under

  Section 164 of the Code. However, the record is not clear whether Vikas

  Meshram was examined under Section 164, and, if not, the reason for such

  non-examination. In cross-examination of this witness, a suggestion made

  to him was replied as under:-



     The 
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973

                                                                       11

          “P.W.1 had stated that people beat the accused by fist
          and kick blows. It is mentioned in his statement:”

8.6     Vikas Meshram was not examined in the trial as a witness.



Similarly, Baban Sambhaji Meshram, the father of the Appellant (referred

to in the FIR); and Shrawan and Meshram (referred to in the deposition of

PW2) were not examined as witnesses.



9.      In the examination of the Appellant under Section 313 of the Code,

when the evidence of PW7 Dr. Ulhas Digambar Lingawar was put to him,

the Appellant stated that the evidence was false. Similar was his response,

when the evidence that the blood of the victim was found on his full pant,

was put to him. His explanation to Question No.61 was:-


          “Q.61 :     Do you want to explain as to why prosecution
                      witnesses are deposing against you?



          Ans. :      When I had gone to the house of deceased
                      girl, her parents had a talk regarding the
                      giving of human sacrifice of the deceased to
                      find out the hidden treasure and after hearing
                      it when I told them that if they do such act
                      then I will lodge the report against them but
                      they had lodged the false report against me
                      and deposed falsely.”



10.     The Trial Court found that the following circumstances established

the guilt of the Appellant.



          “(i) The first circumstance is that the accused took away
               the deceased victim child from the lap of P.W.2,
               father-in-law of the complainant i.e. victim’s father
               by saying that the father of the deceased victim told
               him to bring the deceased victim to him.

                                                                        12


          (ii) The second circumstance is that the deceased victim
               child was in the custody of the accused since the time
               he took her away from P.W.2.



          (iii) The third circumstance is that the deceased victim
                child was found lying isolated place where the
                construction of Anganwadi building was in progress
                and the accused was also found lying on the same
                spot near the deceased victim child.



          (iv) The fourth circumstance is that as per report Exh. 44
               issued by P.W.7 Dr. Lingawar, the injury of abrasion
               on tip of glance of penis was found on examination of
               the accused and he opined that the sign of sexual
               intercourse within 24 hours was present and it is due
               to sexual intercourse.



          (v) The fifth circumstance is that the pant of deceased
              victim child, pair of chappal of accused, pieces of
              flesh were seized from the spot of incident as per
              Exh.20.



          (vi) The sixth circumstance is that the pant, shirt and
               knicker with the stains of semen of the accused were
               seized as per seizure panchanama Exh.26.



          (vii)The seventh circumstance is that as per C.A. report
               Exh. 54 the blood present over the full pant of the
               accused was found to be of the deceased victim child
               and it shows the perfect matching with the blood of
               the deceased victim.



          (viii)The eighth circumstance is that as per postmortem
                report Exh.53 and opinion of Dr. Gadge who had
                conducted autopsy on the dead body of victim child,
                the injury No.17 was caused by forceful insertion of
                the penis as there was forceful sexual assault on the
                deceased victim child and the death of victim child
                was caused due to perineal tear and multiple injuries
                and the injuries were caused due to nibbling by teeth
                and bite marks were found over the parts of the body
                of deceased victim child. Even the pieces of flesh
                were also found on the spot of incident which shows
                the brutality in commission of crime.”


10.1   Finding the Appellant guilty of the offences with which he was

charged, the Trial Court in its judgment dated 14.8.2015, stated:-

                                                                          13


           “40. After declaring the accused guilty for the offences
           punishable under 
Section 376(1)(2)(f)(i)(m)
 of Indian
           Penal Code, under 
Section 376-A
 of Indian Penal Code,
           under 
Section 302
 of Indian Penal Code, and under
           
Section 6
 of Protection of Children from Sexual Offences
           Act, I take a pause to hear the accused on the point of
           sentence.”


10.2     Thereafter, on the same day, the Trial Court recorded:-



           “42. The learned Public Prosecutor has submitted that the
           deceased victim was helpless child aged two years and the
           accused is related to her. The accused had committed rape
           and murder after taking away the victim child from her
           grandfather and as per the injuries described in P.M. report
           by P.W.10 Dr. Gadge, the accused had committed inhuman
           act because the victim child had sustained injury of
           perineal tear and injuries of bite marks and even the lips
           were removed and as per the injury No.17 the injury of
           perineal tear was caused by forceful sexual assault on the
           deceased victim child by the accused. Therefore, there are
           aggravating circumstances and the crime was well
           planned. It is further submitted that there is no chance of
           reformation of the accused. The learned Public Prosecutor
           has further submitted that the case falls under the category
           of ‘rarest of rare case’ for awarding death sentence. 
In
           support of his submission he has placed reliance on the
           observations made by the Hon’ble Apex Court in the case
           of 
Vasanta Sampat Dupare vs. State of Maharashtra
,
           reported in 2015 Cri. L.J. 774, in which the Hon’ble Apex
           Court has observed that,

                 “The gullibility and vulnerability of the four
                 years girl, who could not have nurtured any
                 idea about the maladroitly designed biological
                 desires of this nature, went with the uncle who
                 extinguished her life spark. The barbaric act of
                 the appellant does not remotely show any
                 concern for the precious life of a young minor
                 child who had really not seen life. The
                 criminality of the conduct of the appellant is
                 not only depraved and debased, but can have a
                 menacing effect on the society”.




   2015 Cr. L.J. 774 : (2015) 1 SCC 253

                                                                          14

               It is also held by the Hon’ble Apex Court in the
               cited ruling that,

               “A helpless and defenceless child gets raped and
               murdered because of the acquaintance of the
               appellant with the people of the society. This is
               not only betrayal of an individual trust but
               destruction and devastation of social trust. It is
               perversity in its enormity. It irrefragably invites
               the extreme abhorrence and indignation of the
               collective. It is an anthema to the social balance.
               It meets the test of rarest of rare case and
               therefore, death sentence is affirmed.”


           43. The learned Public Prosecutor has further submitted
           that the prosecution case as per the ruling cited supra in
           which the death sentence was awarded was also based on
           circumstantial evidence and it was considered in the
           category of rarest of rare cases.



 
44. Having regard to the facts and circumstances and
           evidence on record, I am inclined to accept the argument
           advanced by the learned Public Prosecutor because in the
           facts of the ruling cited supra [
Wakkar and another vs.
           State of U.P.
] by the learned defence counsel, there were
           two accused and it was not possible to discern and arrive
           at any definite conclusion as to the role played by each of
           the accused.
 
Here in the present case there is only one
           accused who committed rape and murder of the helpless
           and innocent child aged two years, therefore, ruling
           [
Vasanta Dupare vs. State of Maharashtra6
] is applicable to
           the present case.




           45. It is necessary to mention that brutality in committing
           rape on the deceased victim child aged two years and
           taking away the life of deceased victim child is required to
           be taken into consideration for coming to the conclusion
           that the case is rarest of rare one warranting imposition of
           death sentence.



           46. The deceased victim female child aged two years only
           was innocent and helpless child. Having regard to the facts
           and circumstances of the crime and considering the
           relevant factors, sentence of life imprisonment appears to
           be inadequate punishment and I am of the opinion that this
           is the case which falls in the category of rarest or rare
           cases warranting the imposition of death sentence for the
           offence punishable under Section 376-A of Indian Penal

   (2011) 3 SCC 306

                                                                           15

           Code and for offence punishable under 
Section 302
 of
           Indian Penal Code.”


10.3     The Trial Court thus, by its order passed on the same day awarded

Death Sentence to the Appellant on two counts, i.e. under 
Section 302
 of

IPC and under 
Section 376-A
 of IPC; Rigorous Imprisonment for life under

two counts, i.e. Section 376(1)(2)(f), (i) and (m) of 
IPC
 and under 
Section 6


of POCSO Act. The Death Sentence was subject to confirmation by the

High Court.



11.      The matter concerning confirmation of Death Sentence and the

substantive appeal by the Appellant against his conviction were dealt with

together and by its judgment and order presently under appeal, the

conviction and sentence passed by the Trial Court were affirmed by the

High Court. It was observed by the High Court:

 
“37. By applying yardstick set by the Apex Court in the
           case of 
Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab
  and 
Machhi
           Singh and others v. State of Punjab
 (cited supra) and the
           observations of this Court in the matter of Rakesh Kamble
           if the present matter is considered, in our opinion, in the
           guideline of aggravating circumstances, there is a mention
           of clause (b) which deal with the murder which involves
           exceptional depravity. In the light of the clause, if the
           present matter is seen, the record reveals that the victim is
           a child of two and half years of age. The victim was
           subjected to a forceful sexual exploitation. The medical
           evidence shows that the death is caused due to the forceful
           intercourse. In our opinion, the present case also covers
           clause (a) of “aggravating circumstances” wherein it is
           referred that if a murder is committed after previous
           planning and involves extreme brutality. In the present
           matter, a child was taken from the custody of the

   (1980) 2 SCC 684
   (1983) 3 SCC 470

                                                                          16

           grandfather and in spite of his resistance, a child was
           subjected to sexual violence and then was done to death.
           In our opinion, the act of the appellant/accused falls in
           clauses (a) and (b) of the “aggravating circumstances”.


We would also take into consideration the mitigating
           circumstances referred to in the judgment of the Apex
           Court in the case of 
Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab
 (cited
           supra). In our opinion, the only mitigating circumstance
           on which the appellant/accused seeks benefit of clause (2)
           i.e. the accused is a young boy. Even though the said
           mitigating circumstance of being of young age is available
           to the appellant/accused while balancing the aggravating
           and mitigating factors, we are of the opinion that the said
           mitigating circumstance would not be of any help to the
           appellant/accused.




                                   … … …


 
41. In the present case also, the accused is the maternal
           uncle of the victim child. The Apex Court recently in the
           matter of 
Purushottam Dashrath Borate and another v.
           State of Maharashtra
 (cited supra), wherein the victim
           deceased who was serving in a private company and was
           subjected to rape and murder at the hands of the security
           guard and was awarded death sentence on consideration of
           the submission that the appellant/accused is a person of
           young age, observed that such compassionate grounds are
           present in most of the cases and are not relevant for
           interference in awarding death sentence. The Apex Court
           further observed that the principle that when the offence is
           gruesome and was committed in a calculated and
           diabolical manner, the age of the accused may not be a
           relevant factor.




                “15. In our opinion, the measure of
                punishment in a given case must depend upon
                the atrocity of the crime; the conduct of the
                criminal and the defenceless and unprotected
                state of the victim. Imposition of appropriate
                punishment is the manner in which the Courts
                respond to the society’s cry for justice against
                the criminals. Justice demands that Courts
                should impose punishment befitting the crime
                so that the Courts reflect public abhorrence of
                the crime. The Courts must not only keep in
                view the rights of the criminal but also the
                rights of the victim of crime and the society at


   (2015) 6 SCC 652

                                                                17

      large while considering         imposition    of
      appropriate punishment.”

The Apex Court also made it clear that lack of criminal
antecedents also cannot be considered as mitigating
circumstances, particularly taking into consideration, the
nature of heinous offence and cold and calculated manner
in which it was committed by the accused persons.


42. The Apex Court in the matter of 
Vasanta Sampat
Dupare v. State of Maharashtra6
 (cited supra), wherein the
victim was a girl of four years of age and the
appellant/accused, a neighbour luring the victim for giving
her chocolate, raped her and done her to death by hit of
stones. The Apex Court on the backdrop of the medical
evidence, namely the victim was subjected to forceful
sexual intercourse, the deceased was last seen with the
accused and the immediate lodgement of report by the
father of the girl, lending credence to the prosecution case,
observed thus:




      “60. In the case at hand, as we find, not only
      was the rape committed in a brutal manner, but
      murder was also committed in a barbaric
      manner. The rape of a minor girl child is
      nothing but a monstrous burial of her dignity
      in the darkness. It is a crime against the holy
      body of a girl child and the soul of society and
      such a crime is aggravated by the manner in
      which it has been committed. The nature of
      the crime and the manner in which it has been
      committed speaks about its uncommonness.
      The crime speaks of depravity, degradation
      and uncommonality. It is diabolical and
      barbaric. The crime was committed in an
      inhuman manner. Indubitably, these go a long
      way      to    establish     the    aggravating
      circumstances.



      61. We are absolutely conscious that
      mitigating circumstances are to be taken into
      consideration. The learned Counsel for the
      appellant pointing out the mitigating
      circumstances would submit that the appellant
      is in his mid-fifties and there is possibility of
      his reformation. Be it noted, the appellant was
      aged about forty seven years at the time of
      commission of the crime. As is noticeable,
      there has been no remorse on the part of
      appellant. There are cases when this Court has

                                                                     18

              commuted the death sentence to life finding
              that the accused has expressed remorse or the
              crime was not premeditated. But the obtaining
              factual matrix when unfolded stage by stage
              would show the premeditation, the proclivity
              and the rapacious desire. The learned Counsel
              would submit that the appellant had no
              criminal antecedents but we find that he was a
              history-sheeter and had a number of cases
              pending against him. That alone may not be
              sufficient. The appalling cruelty shown by
              him to the minor girl child is extremely
              shocking and it gets accentuated, when his age
              is taken into consideration.       It was not
              committed under any mental stress or
              emotional disturbance and it is difficult to
              comprehend that he would not commit such
              acts and would be reformed or rehabilitated.

              As the circumstances would graphically
              depict, he would remain a menace to society,
              for a defenceless child has become his prey. In
              our considered opinion, there are no mitigating
              circumstances.



              62. As we perceive, this case deserves to
              fall in the category of the rarest of rare cases.
              It is inconceivable from the perspective of the
              society that a married man aged about two
              scores and seven makes a four years minor
              innocent girl child the prey of his lust and
              deliberately causes her death. A helpless and
              defenceless child gets raped and murdered
              because of the acquaintance of the appellant
              with the people of the society. This is not only
              betrayal of an individual trust but destruction
              and devastation of social trust. It is perversity
              in its enormity. It irrefragably invites the
              extreme abhorrence and indignation of the
              collective. It is an anathema to the social
              balance. In our view, it meets the test of the
              rarest of the rare case and we unhesitatingly so
              hold.”


       With this view, the High Court upheld the conviction and sentence

as recorded by the Trial Court and confirmed the Death Sentence.

                                                                      19


12.    As the Death Sentence and life imprisonment have been awarded

on two counts each, the statutory changes that the concerned provisions of

the IPC and POCSO Act have undergone may briefly be adverted to:-


A.     Before 03.02.2013, the relevant portions of 
Sections 375
, 
376
 and


376A
 of IPC were as under:-



         “375. Rape.–A man is said to commit “rape” who, except
         in the case hereinafter excepted, has sexual intercourse
         with a woman under circumstances falling under any of
         the six folloing descriptions:-



         Firstly.    Against her will.

         Secondy.- Without her consent.

         Thirdly.-   …..

         Fourthly.- …..

         Fifthly.-   …..


         Sixthly.-   With or without her consent, when she is
                     under sixteen years of age.



         Explanation …..



         “376. Punishment for rape-(1) Whoever, except in the
         cases provided for by sub-section (2), commits rape shall
         be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
         term which shall not be less than seven years but which
         may for life or for a term which may extend to ten years
         and shall also be liable to fine unless the woman raped is
         his own wife and is not under twelve years of age, in
         which cases, he shall be punished with imprisonment of
         either description for a term which may extend to two
         years or with fine or with both:



              Provided that the court may, for adequate and special
         reasons to be mentioned in the judgement, impose a
         sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than seven
         years.



         (2) Whoever,-

                                                                         20


               (a)    …..

               (b)    …..

               (c)    …..

               (d)    …..

               (e)    …..


               (f)   commits rape on a woman when she is under
               twelve years of age; or


               (g)    …..



               shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a
          term which shall not be less than ten years but which may
          be for life and shall also be liable to fine:



               Provided that the Court may, for adequate and special
          reasons to be mentioned in the judgement, impose a
          sentence of imprisonment of either description for a term
          of less than ten years.



          Explanation 1.- …..



          Explanation 2.- …..



          Explanation 3.- …..



          “376A. Intercourse by a man with his wife during
          separation.-whoever has sexual intercourse with his own
          wife, who is living separately from him under a decree of
          separation or under any custom or usage without her
          consent shall be punished with imprisonment of either
          description for a term which may extend to two years and
          shall also be liable to fine”


B.     On 03.02.2013, the Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013

(No.3 of 2013), hereinafter referred to as the Ordinance was promulgated

by the President of India. 
Section 8
 of the Ordinance inter alia substituted

                                                                        21


Sections 375
, 
376
 and 
376A
 of IPC; the relevant text of the substituted

provisions being:-



          “375.        A person is said to commit “sexual assault” if
          that person-



          (a) penetrates his penis, to any extent, into the vagina,
          mouth, urethra or anus of another person or makes the
          person to do so with him or any other person; or


          (b) …..



          (c) …..



          (d) …..



          (e) touches the vagina, penis, anus or breast of the person
          or makes the person touch the vagina, penis, anus or breast
          of that person or any other person,

          except where such penetration or touching is carried out
          for proper hygienic or medical purposes under the
          circumstances falling under any of the following seven
          descriptions:-



          First-Against the other person’s will.



          Secondly.- Without the other person’s consent.



          Thirdly.- …..



          Fourthly.- …..



          Fifthly.-…..



          Sixthly.-With or without the other person’s consent, when
          such other person is under eighteen years of age.



          Seventhly.-…..



          Explanation 1 .….



          Explanation 2 …..



          Explanation 3 …..



          Exception. …..

                                                               22


376. (1) Whoever, except in the cases provided for by sub-

section (2), commits sexual assault, shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment of either description for a term
which shall not be less than seven years but which may
extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to
fine.



(2) whoever,-

    (a) …..



         (i) …..



         (ii) …..



         (iii) …..



    (b) …..



    (c) …..





    (d) …..





    (e) …..





    (f) being a relative, guardian or teacher of, or a
    person in a position of trust or authority towards, the
    person assaulted, commits sexual assault on such
    person; or



    (g) …..





    (h) commits sexual assault on a person when such
    person is under eighteen years of age; or



    (i) …..





    (j) …..





    (k) …..





    (l) while committing sexual assault causes grievous
    bodily harm or maims or disfigures or endangers the
    life of a person; or

                                                                        23


             (m) …..




               shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a
         term which shall not be less than ten years but which may
         extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to
         fine.



         Explanation 1.- …..



         Explanation 2.- …..




         376A. Whoever, commits an offence punishable under
         sub-section (1) of sub-section (2) of section 376 and in the
         course of such commission inflicts an injury which causes
         the death of the person or cause the person to be in a
         persistent vegetative state, shall be punished with rigorous
         imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
         twenty years, but which may extend to imprisonment for
         life, which shall mean the remainder of that person’s
         natural life, or with death.”



C)     The Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013
 (No.13 of 2013),

hereinafter referred to as the Amendment Act received the assent of the

President and was published on 02.04.2013 but was given retrospective

effect from 03.02.2013.        Section 9 of the Amendment Act inter alia

substituted 
Sections 375
, 
376
 and 
376A
 of IPC as under:-



         “375.       A man is said to commit “rape” if he-



         (a) penetrates his penis, to any extent, into the vagina,
         mouth, urethra or anus of a woman or makes her to do so
         with him or any other person; or


         (b) …..



         (c) …..



         (d) …..

                                                               24


     under the circumstances falling under any of the
following seven descriptions: -



First.- Against her will.



Secondly.- Without her consent.



Thirdly.- …..



Fourthly.-…..



Fifthly. …..



Sixthly.-With or without her consent, when she is under
eighteen years of age.



Seventhly.- …..



Explanation 1……

Explanation 2……
Exception 1……

Exception 2…..



376. (1) Whoever, except in the cases provided for in sub-

section (2), commits rape, shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall
not be less than seven years, but which may extend to
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.

(2) Whoever,-



(a) …..



(b) …..



(c) …..



(d) …..



(e) …..





(f) being a relative, guardian or teacher of, or a person in
a position of trust or authority towards the woman,
commits rape on such woman; or

                                                                         25


          (g) …..



          (h) …..



          (i) commits rape on a woman when she is under sixteen
          years of age; or


          (j) …..



          (k) …..



          (l) …..



          (m) while committing rape causes grievous bodily harm
          or maims or disfigures or endangers the life of a woman;
          or


          (n) …..



                shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a
          term which shall not be less than ten years, but which may
          extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean
          imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s natural
          life, and shall also be liable to fine.



          Explanation.- …..



          376A. Whoever, commits an offence punishable under
          sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 376 and in the
          course of such commission inflicts an injury which causes
          the death of the woman or causes the woman to be in a
          persistent vegetative state, shall be punished with rigorous
          imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
          twenty years, but which may extend to imprisonment for
          life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of
          that person’s natural life, or with death.”


        While repealing the Ordinance, Section 30 of the Amendment Act

states as under:-



          “30. (1) The Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013
          is hereby repealed.



          (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any
          action taken under the 
Indian Penal Code
, the 
Code of
          Criminal Procedure
, 1973 and the Indian Evidence Act,

                                                                      26

          1872, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed
          to have been done or taken under the corresponding
          provisions of those Acts, as amended by this Act.”


D.     The Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2018 (Act 22 of 2018)

which came into effect from 21.04.2018, deleted clause (i) of 
Section

376(2)
 of IPC and added sub-section (3) after Section 376(2) as well as

inserted Section 376AB as under:



          “376       …                     …              …

          (3) Whoever, commits rape on a woman under sixteen
          years of age shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment
          for a term which shall not be less than twenty years, but
          which may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall
          mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s
          natural life, and shall also be liable to fine:



          …                         …                     …


          “376AB- Punishment for rape on woman under twelve
          years of age- Whoever, commits rape on a woman under
          twelve years of age shall be punished with rigorous
          imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
          twenty years, but which may extend to imprisonment for
          life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of
          that person’s natural life, and with fine or with death:



              …                     …                     …”


     Since the offence in the instant case was committed well before

21.04.2018, we are not called upon to consider the effect of Act 22 of

2018 but the provisions are noted for the sake of completeness.



E.     
Sections 5
 and 
6
 of the POCSO Act, at the time when the offence

was committed in the instant case, provided: -

                                                            27


“5: Aggravated penetrative sexual assault-

a) …..

b) …..

c) …..

d) ……

e) …..

f) …..

g) …..

h) ….

i) …..

j) Whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on a
child, which-



 (i) Physically incapacitates the child or causes the
     child to become mentally ill as defined under
     clause (b) of 
section 2
 of the mental health
     Act, 1987 (14 of 1987) or causes impairment
     of any kind so as to render the child unable to
     perform regular tasks, temporarily or
     permanently;



 (ii) In the case of female child, makes the child
      pregnant as a consequence of sexual assault;



 (iii) Inflicts     the     child   with    Human
       Immunodeficiency Virus or any other life-

       threatening disease or infection which may
       either temporarily or permanently impair the
       child     by     rendering him     physically
       incapacitated, or mentally ill to perform
       regular tasks;



k) …..

l) …..

m) Whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on a
child below twelve years; or

n) …..

o) …..

p) …..

q) …..

r) …..

s) …..

t) …..

u) …..




“6. Punishment for aggravated penetrative sexual assault.
– Whoever, commits aggravated penetrative sexual

                                                                         28

            assault, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for
            a term which shall not be less than ten years but which
            may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be
            liable to fine.”



      By virtue of the 
Protection of Children from Sexual Offences

(Amendment) Act, 2019
 (Act 25 of 2019) which came into effect on

16.08.2019, sub-Clause (iv) was inserted in Clause (j) of 
Section 5
 as

under:-



            “(iv) causes death of the child; or”


      Further, 
Section 6
 was substituted as under:-



            “6. Punishment for aggravated penetrative sexual assault.-



            (1) Whoever commits aggravated penetrative sexual
            assault shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a
            term which shall not be less than twenty years, but which
            may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean
            imprisonment for the remainder of natural life of that
            person, and shall also be liable to fine, or with death.



            (2) The fine imposed under sub-section (1) shall be just
            and reasonable and paid to the victim to meet the medical
            expenses and rehabilitation of such victim.”



13.       If the abovementioned provisions of 
IPC
 are considered in three

compartments, that is to say,

  (A)       The situation obtaining before 03.02.2013

  (B)       The situation in existence during 03.02.2013 to 02.04.2013 and,

  (C)       The situation obtaining after 02.04.2013:



                following features emerge: -

                                                          29


(i)     The offence under Section 375, as is clear from the

        definition of relevant provision in compartment (A),

        could be committed against a woman. The situation

        was sought to be changed and made gender neutral in

        compartment (B). However, the earlier position now

        stands restored as a result of provisions in

        compartment (C)


(ii)    Before 03.02.2013 the sentence for an offence under

        Section 376(1) could not be less than seven years but

        the maximum sentence could be life imprisonment;



        and for an offence under Section 376(2) the minimum

        sentence could not be less than ten years while the

        maximum sentence could be imprisonment for life.

        Section 376A dealt with cases where a man

        committed non-consensual sexual intercourse with

        his wife in certain situations.



(iii)   As a result of the Ordinance, the sentences for

        offences under Sections 376(1) and 376(2) were

        retained in the same fashion.      However, a new

        provision in the form of Section 376A was

        incorporated under which, if while committing an

                                                                     30

       offence punishable under sub-section (1) or sub-

       section (2) of Section 376, a person “inflicts an

       injury which causes the death” of the victim, the

       accused    could         be      punished      with      rigorous

       imprisonment for a term “which shall not be less

       than 20 years but which may extend to imprisonment

       for life, which shall mean the remainder of that

       person’s natural life or with death”. Thus, for the

       first time, Death Sentence could be imposed if a fatal

       injury was caused during the commission of offence

       under sub-section (1) or (2) of Section 376.


(iv)   Though the provisions of the Amendment Act

       restored the original non gender-neutral position vis-

       à-vis the victim, it made certain changes in sub-

       section (2) of Section 376. Now, the punishment for

       the offence could be rigorous imprisonment for not

       less than ten years which could extend to

       imprisonment       for        life,   “which     shall     mean

       imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s

       natural life”. It was, thus, statutorily made clear that

                                                                       31

                     the imprisonment for life would mean till the last

                     breath of that person’s natural life.



               (V)   Similarly, by virtue of the Amendment Act, for the

                     offence under Section 376A, the punishment could

                     not be less than 20 years which may extend to

                     imprisonment      for    life   which   shall   mean

                     imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s

                     natural life, or with death.





14.      In the instant case, the offence was committed on 11.02.2013

when the provisions of the Ordinance were in force. However, the

Amendment Act having been given retrospective effect from 03.02.2013,

the question arises whether imposition of life sentence for the offence

under Section 376(2) could “mean imprisonment for the remainder of that

person’s natural life”.



        In the present case, since the victim was about two and half years

of age at the time of incident and since it was the Ordinance which was

holding the field, going by the provisions of the Ordinance, Clauses (f),


(h) and (l) of Section 376(2) would get attracted. The comparable

provisions of Section 376(2) as amended by the Amendment Act would

be, Clauses (f), (i) and (m) respectively. As the substantive penal

provisions under the Clauses (f), (h) and (l) as inserted by the Ordinance

                                                                        32

and Clauses (f), (i) and (m) as inserted by the Amendment Act are

identical, no difficulty on that count is presented. But the sentence

prescribed by Section 376(2) as amended by the Amendment Act, has

now, for the first time provided that the imprisonment for life “shall mean

imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s natural life”. This

provision comes with retrospective effect and in a situation where such

prescription was not available on the statute when the offence was

committed, the question arises whether such ex-post facto prescription

would be consistent with the provisions of sub-Article (1) of 
Article 20
 of

the Constitution.





15.    An imposition of life sentence simpliciter does not put any

restraints on the power of the executive to grant remission and

commutation in exercise of its statutory power, subject of course to Section

433A of the Code. But, a statutory prescription that it “shall mean the

remainder of that person’s life” will certainly restrain the executive from

exercising any such statutory power and to that extent the concerned

provision definitely prescribes a higher punishment ex-post facto. In the

process, the protection afforded by 
Article 20(1)
 of the Constitution would

stand negated. We must, therefore, declare that the punishment under


Section 376(2)
 of the IPC in the present case cannot come with stipulation

that the life imprisonment “shall mean the remainder of that person’s life”.

                                                                       33

Similar prescription in 
Section 6
 of the POCSO Act, which came by way

of amendment in 2019, would not be applicable and the governing

provision for punishment for the offence under the 
POCSO Act
 must be

taken to be the pre-amendment position as noted hereinabove.



16.     However, in so far as the situation covered by 
Section 376A
 of IPC

as amended by the Amendment Act is concerned, substantively identical

situation was dealt with by Section 376A as amended by the Ordinance and

the prescription of sentence in Section 376A by the Amendment Act is

identical to that prescribed by Section 376A as amended by the Ordinance.

Section 376A as amended by the Ordinance being gender neutral so far as

victim was concerned, naturally covered cases where a victim was a

woman. Thus, the ex-post facto effect given to Section 376A by the

Amendment Act from the day the Ordinance was promulgated, would not

in way be inconsistent with the provisions of sub-Article (1) of 
Article 20


of the Constitution.





17.     Having considered the legal provisions involved in the matter, we

now turn to the submissions advanced by the learned counsel.



17.1    Ms. Sonia Mathur, learned Senior Advocate for the Appellant

submitted: -

                                                                       34


A)      While noting eight circumstances against the Appellant, certain

circumstances were ignored by the Courts below, namely:-



       (i)       Both the lips of the victim showed clean cut margins

       indicating that the injuries were suffered by a weapon and not by a

       human bite. Further, odontology report was not furnished to

       substantiate the theory that the injuries could be by a human bite

       and by the Appellant.



       (ii)    The vaginal, cervical, and anal swabs were sent for forensic

       examination but none of these could be associated with the

       Appellant.



       These important facets pointing towards innocence of the Appellant

were completely disregarded.




B)      Each of the circumstances found against the Appellant, was then

dealt with as under :-





         (i)   PWs 1 and 2 were not independent witnesses to prove the

         first circumstance that the victim was taken away by the

         Appellant. There were discrepancies in the statements of PWs 1

         and 2. On the other hand witnesses such as Shravan, Vitthal

         Ghodam and Vikas Meshram were not examined at all. Even the

                                                             35

wife of PW2 whose presence was referred to in the statement of

PW2 under Section 164 of the Code, was not examined.



(ii) The fact that the victim was always in the custody of the

Appellant since the time she was taken away from PW2, was not

proved. PW9 was examined to establish this circumstance but did

not support the prosecution.    Moreover, Vikas Meshram who

allegedly saw the victim with the Appellant was also not

examined.



(iii) The spot where the victim was found lying was not an

isolated place but was in the middle of the village surrounded by

houses. No independent witness was examined to corroborate the

version of PWs 1 and 2. Independent witnesses like Shravan,

Vitthal Ghodam and Vikas Meshram were not examined. The

initial noting in the form of GD entry 40/13 (which was referred

to in the FIR) mentioned that the Appellant took away the victim

to the jungle and killed her.



(iv) The Appellant was examined at the time of arrest but the

medical evidence in that behalf was not placed on record.



However, the prosecution chose to rely on the medical evidence

through the opinion of PW7 Dr. Lingawar.

                                                              36


(v) The spot panchnama was done at 8:30 a.m. next day i.e.

more than eight hours after the arrest of the Appellant.      The

chappals found at the spot were not sent for any examination, nor

was any evidence led to show that they belonged to the Appellant.

Though, the pieces of flesh seized from the spot were sent for

forensic examination, there was nothing on record to show that

the flesh was of a human being and of the victim.



(vi) The FSL report did not find any semen on any of the articles

sent for examination and the finding rendered by the Courts below

in so far as 6th circumstance was thus erroneous.



(vii) There were discrepancies in the chain of custody of the

clothes referred to in the 7th circumstance. At the time of his

arrest no blood was noticed on the clothes of the Appellant.

PW13, the Investigating officer accepted that he “did not find any

suspicious thing” with the Appellant. Even when the Appellant

was examined by PW7 Dr. Ulhas Digambar Lingawar, no blood

was detected.    The seizure report also did not disclose any

presence of blood spots on the clothes of the Appellant. The

trousers of the Appellant were in police custody from 12.02.2013

                                                                          37

         till 14.02.2013 and no malkhana record or witnesses were

         produced.



               It would, therefore, be highly unlikely that “moderate

         number of blood stains ranging from 0.1 to 2cm mostly on front

         portion” found in the FSL report could have been missed out at

         the earlier stages. The evidence would therefore be unworthy of

         reliance.



              Further, there was a requisition for videography of the post

         mortem and yet no video-graphs were placed on record, in the

         absence of which the material sent for DNA examination could

         not be relied upon.





         (viii) The record certainly indicated that the victim was sexually

         assaulted but the eighth circumstance did not by itself establish

         that the Appellant was the author of crime.





C)      The facts on record did not conclusively establish the guilt of the

Appellant. Since the case was based on circumstantial evidence, going by

the principles 
laid down by
 this Court, the case was not established at all.



17.2    While dealing with the question of sentence Ms. Mathur, learned

Senior Advocate submitted: -

                                                                           38


I)        The sentence of death having been passed on the same day when the

          conviction order was pronounced, there was non-compliance of

          Section 235(2) of the Code and as laid down by this Court in

          Allauddin Mian v. State of Bihar, Malkiat Singh and others v.



          State of Punjab and Ajay Pandit v. State of Maharashtra, the

          infraction on that count was sufficient to consider commutation of

          the sentence of death to that of life imprisonment.


II)       The instant case being based on circumstantial evidence, as held by

          this Court in 
Bishnu Prasad Sinha v. State of Assam
, 
Sebastian @

          Chevithiyan v. State of Kerala
, 
Purna Chandra Kusal v. State of

          Orissa
 and 
Kalu Khan v. State of Rajasthan
 , no death sentence be

          awarded and the appropriate punishment could be life sentence.


III)      Relying on the decisions of this Court in 
Ashok Debabarma @

          Achak Debbarma v. State of Tripura
, 
Sudam v. State
 of

          Maharashtraand Ravishankar alias 
Baba Vishwakarma vs. State

          of Madhya Pradesh
, it was submitted that even if the circumstances

      (1989) 3 SCC 5 para 10
     (1991) 4 SCC 341 para 18
     (2012) 8 SCC 43 para 47
     (2007) 11 SCC 467 para 55
     (2010) 1 SCC 58 para 17
     (2011) 15 SCC 352 para 7
     (2015) 16 SCC 492 paras 16, 23 and 31
     (2014) 4 SCC 747
     (2019) 9 SCC 388
     (2019) 9 SCC 689

                                                                             39

         on record were sufficient to record conviction against the Appellant,

         there were gaps in the evidence and the benefit of “residual doubt”

         ought to be extended in favour of the Appellant.


IV)      In terms of law 
laid down by
 this Court in 
Rajesh Kumar v. State


         through Government of NCT of Delhi, the burden was on the

         prosecution to rule out the possibility of reformation of the

         Appellant and that as held in 
Mohinder Singh v. State of Punjab
,

         the exclusion of possibility of reformation could only be on the basis

         of evidence led by the prosecution.




V)       The Appellant completed Bachelors Preparatory programme (BPP)

         from Indira Gandhi National Open University in 2017 while in

         prison and is presently pursuing Bachelors Degree course in Arts.

VI)      The Appellant was about 21 years of age at the time of incident and

         as held by this Court in 
Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab8
,

         
Rameshbhai Chandubhai Rathod (2) v. State of Gujarat
, 
Amit v.

         State of U.P.
 and 
Sunil v. State of M.P.
, the young age of the

         Appellant at the time of incident is a factor in his favour.


VII) The socio-economic condition of the Appellant showed that he was a

         labourer and belonged to Scheduled Tribes which again would be a
    (2011) 13 SCC 706 paras 72 to 74
    (2013) 3 SCC 294, paras 22, 23
    (2011) 2 SCC 764 paras 8 and 10
    (2012) 4 SCC 107 para 22
    (2017) 4 SCC 393 para 12

                                                                        40

        factor in his favour as held by this Court in 
Sunil Damodar

        Gaikwad v. State of Maharashtra
.




VIII) The family of the Appellant being in touch with the him, there is a

        strong probability of rehabilitation as observed by this Court in

        
Mohinder Singh v. State of Punjab22
.




IX)     Further, as there were no criminal antecedents as has been ruled by

        this Court in Surendra Pal Shivbalak Pal v. State of Gujarat ,

        
Mahesh Dhanaji Shinde v. State of Maharashtra
.
 
, 
Santosh

        Kumar Singh v. State of M.P.
  and 
Shyam Singh @ Bhima v. State

        of Madhya Pradesh
, due weightage ought to be given in favour of

        the Appellant.






17.3     Mr. Sushil Karanjkar, learned Advocate for the State submitted that

all the aforesaid eight circumstances were individually established beyond

any doubt and they collectively formed a clear and consistent chain ruling

out every other hypothesis except the guilt of the Appellant.        It was

submitted that as held by this Court in 
B. A. Umesh vs. Registrar General,

High
 Court of Karnataka and subsequent cases, the mere fact that the


   (2014) 1 SCC 129 para 20
   (2005) 3 SCC 127 para 13
   (2014) 4 SCC 292 paras 38 and 39
   (2014) 12 SCC 650 para 30
   (2017) 11 SCC 265 paras 6 and 8
    (2017) 4 SCC 124

                                                                              41

    death sentence was pronounced on the same day when the conviction was

    recorded, by itself would not be sufficient to commute the death sentence

    to life imprisonment; and that the Appellant had sufficient opportunity to

    advance submissions on the issue of sentence which opportunity was

    availed of.    He also submitted that the circumstances having been

    established beyond any shadow of doubt there was no room for any

    “residual doubt”.
 
In his submission, the factors that the crime in the instant

    case was gruesome and diabolical, where two and a half year old girl was

    subjected to sexual assault and the manner in which it was committed,

    were by themselves weighty and sufficient to tilt the balance against the

    Appellant and that as 
laid down by
 this Court in 
Vasanta Sampat Dupare

    v. State of Maharashtra6
, in review arising therefrom (in 
Vasanta Sampat

    Dupare v. State of Maharashtra
), and in 
Mukesh and Another v. State

    ( NCT of Delhi) and Others
, the extreme depravity and the barbaric

    manner in which the crime was committed would clearly outweigh any

    mitigating circumstance advanced on behalf of the Appellant.


 
18.     We shall first consider the evidence on record to see whether the

    guilt of the Appellant is conclusively established on the strength of the

    material on record; and whether the circumstances on record form a clear

    and consistent chain to rule out every other hypothesis except the guilt of
        (2017) 6 SCC 631
     (2017) 6 SCC 1

                                                                           42

the Appellant. The law on the point is clear from the following

observations of this Court in 
Sharad Birdhichand Sarda vs. State of

Maharashtra
,

           “153. A close analysis of this decision would show that the
           following conditions must be fulfilled before a case
           against an accused can be said to be fully established:


              (1)          the circumstances from which the conclusion
                           of guilt is to be drawn should be fully
                           established.



 
It may be noted here that this Court indicated that the
           circumstances concerned “must or should” and not “may
           be” established. There is not only a grammatical but a
           legal distinction between “may be proved” and “must be
           or should be proved” as was held by this Court in 
Shivaji
           Sahabrao Bobade v. State of Maharashtra
 where the
           observations were made:




              “Certainly, it is a primary principle that the
              accused must be and not merely may be guilty
              before a court can convict and the mental distance
              between ‘may be’ and ‘must be’ is long and
              divides vague conjectures from sure conclusions.”

              (2)          the facts so established should be consistent
                           only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the
                           accused, that is to say, they should not be
                           explainable on any other hypothesis except
                           that the accused is guilty,

              (3)          the circumstances should be of a conclusive
                           nature and tendency,

              (4)          they should exclude every possible hypothesis
                           except the one to be proved, and

              (5)          there must be a chain of evidence so complete
                           as not to leave any reasonable ground for the
                           conclusion consistent with the innocence of

 (1984) 4 SCC 116
    (1973) 2 SCC    793

                                                                       43

                    the accused and must show that in all human
                    probability the act must have been done by the
                    accused.”


       These principles have since then been followed consistently.



18.1   According to the prosecution, on the day in question at about 7:30

p.m. when the victim was with her grandfather, on the pretext that the

father of the victim had asked the Appellant to bring the victim, the

Appellant, who was maternal uncle of the victim, took her away. This part

of the evidence is conclusively established through the testimony of PW2,

the grandfather. This version finds mention in the FIR which was recorded

within few hours of the incident and in the statement of PW2 recorded

under Section 164 of the Code. There is nothing on record to doubt the

veracity of said version. It is true that some other witnesses were not

examined by the prosecution but the strength of the testimony of PW2 does

not get diminished on any count nor can it be said that his testimony loses

its weight because the witness was the grandfather of the victim. The

version coming through this witness is cogent, consistent and also figured

in prompt reporting of the FIR. We have, therefore, no hesitation in

accepting that the first circumstance as noted by the Trial Court stands

conclusively established.

                                                                       44

18.2    As deposed by PWs 1 and 2, the Appellant was found by the side

of the victim at the spot i.e. in the premises of Anganwadi. The victim

was having various injuries whereafter she was taken for medical

attention.   Soon after the incident, the Appellant was also medically

examined and Report Exbt. 46 showed injury on his body. Even if PW9

had turned hostile and some other witnesses were not examined, the fact

that the victim was always in the custody of Appellant till she was found

at the spot alongside the Appellant is quite clear. The proximity in terms

of time and the promptitude in reporting are crucial factors and the

evidence in that behalf is completely trustworthy. Thus, in our view, the

second and third circumstances are also fully established.



18.3    Soon after his arrest, the Appellant was produced for medical

examination before PW 7 Dr. Ulhas Digambar Lingawar, who found

injury on private parts of the Appellant. The approximate time of said

injury as given in the opinion Exh.46 is consistent with the case of

prosecution. The submission however is that the Appellant was also

examined by another medical professional and that report was not placed

on record. The reference to the medical examination of the Appellant in

terms of Section 53A of the Code was not to any other medical

professional but to PW 7 Dr. Lingawar. No explanation, not even a

suggestion came from the Appellant how there could be an injury on his

                                                                         45

body as noticed in Report Exh.46. Thus, the 4th circumstance also stands

fully established.




18.4      While considering the 5th circumstance, it must be stated that as

per record, the chappals were not proved to be that of the Appellant and

the pieces of flesh found at the spot of incident were also not proved to be

that of a human being. To that extent, 5 th circumstance was not proved at

all. However, the fact that the pant of the victim was found at the spot of

incident is well established on record, and the 5 th circumstance must be

taken to be proved only with respect to the recovery of the pant of the

victim.




18.5      There is nothing on record to show that the stains of semen found

on clothing referred to in 6th circumstance, were medically proved to be

that of, or could be associated with the Appellant. The 6 th circumstance

cannot therefore be taken to be pointing against the Appellant.


18.6      In terms of Chemical Analyser’s Report Ext.54, the blood found

on the trousers of the Appellant was that of the victim. This fact is

completely established. The submission however, is:-


          (a)   Nothing suspicious was found by PW13 the Investigating

          Officer with the Appellant at the time of his arrest; and

                                                                           46


       (b)     PW7 Dr. Lingawar had not noticed any blood stains on the

       trousers of the Appellant at the time of his medical examination;



       (c)     No malkhana report or evidence was produced on record to

       state that the articles remained in proper custody and in sealed

       condition.



       The answer given by the Investigating Officer cannot be stretched

to say that there were no blood stains on his trousers at the time of arrest.

The medical opinion was obtained to consider whether there were any

injuries on the private parts of the Appellant and whether he was capable

of having sexual intercourse. The facts on record show that the articles

were sent for FSL examination at the earliest.


       The Appellant was represented by a counsel of standing in the

Trial Court.   The theory that the blood spots on the trousers of the

Appellant were subsequently planted was not even developed in the cross

examination of the concerned witnesses.



       Given the quick succession of steps in investigation, including the

medical examination and seizure of the clothes of the Appellant, we do

not find any infirmity. We, therefore, accept that the 7 th circumstance

stands fully established.




18.7    It is a matter of record that as per Post-Mortem report and medical

opinion, there was forceful sexual assault on the victim and her death was

                                                                              47

caused due to injury No.17 which was in the nature of multiple lacerations

over vaginal and anal region; and merging of vaginal and anal orifices.


        The 8th circumstance must therefore be taken to be proved fully

except to the extent that said circumstance makes reference to pieces of

flesh found at the spot of incident.





19.     Do     the   circumstances      established   on   record   satisfy   the

requirements spelt out in the decision of this Court in Sharad Birdhichand

Sarda34 is the next question for consideration.


        The established circumstances show:-



        a) The victim was in the custody of the Appellant, from the time

             she was taken from her grandfather till she was found lying in

             the premises of Anganwadi; where the Appellant was also

             found lying next to her.



        b) The victim, who was hale and hearty when she was taken by

             the Appellant, had number of injuries on her body when she

             was found next to the Appellant.



        c) The injuries on the body of the victim show that she was

             abused and sexually exploited.



        d) The sexual assault was so forceful that the victim, a two-and-a-



             half-year-old girl suffered, among other injuries, Injury No.17.

                                                                           48


       e) Injury No.17, as described above, was so severe that there was

             merging of vaginal and anal orifices.



       f) The victim died because of Injury No.17.



       g) The Appellant had an injury on his private parts corresponding

             to the period when the victim was in his custody.


       h) The Appellant was found to be capable of having sexual

             intercourse.



       i) The trousers of the Appellant had blood stains, the DNA

             profiles of which, matched with that of the blood of the victim.


       These circumstances at serial numbers a) to i) stand proved

beyond any doubt and by themselves constitute a conclusive and

consistent chain excluding every other hypothesis except the guilt of the

Appellant.





20.    We must at this stage deal with the submission of Ms. Mathur,

learned Senior Advocate about non-consideration of certain circumstances

by the Courts below.



       It is true that the injuries on the lips of the victim showed that the

margins were clean cut and given the nature of evidence in that behalf, it

cannot be said with certainty that those injuries could be taken to be the

result of human bites. But the other injuries on the body of the victim

                                                                        49

were definitely by human bites and as such the absence of clarity with

regard to the injuries on the lips does not render the case of the

prosecution doubtful in any manner.



       Again, the absence of association of vaginal, cervical and anal

swabs with the Appellant does not in any way diminish the strength of

evidence against the Appellant.





21.    The circumstances proved on record are not only conclusive in

nature but completely support the case of the prosecution and are

consistent with only one hypothesis and that is the guilt of the Appellant.

They form a chain, so complete, consistent and clear, that no room for

doubt or ground arises pointing towards innocence of the Appellant. It is,

therefore, established beyond any shadow of doubt that the Appellant

committed the acts of rape and sexual assault upon the victim and that

injury no.17 was the cause of death of the victim.



22.    The Appellant is thus guilty of having committed offences

punishable under clauses (f), (i) and (m) of sub-section (2) of 
Section 376


of IPC; and also, under clauses (j) and (m) of 
Section 5
 read with 
Section 6


of the POCSO Act, (as it stood before it was amended by Act 25 of 2019).

Since according to medical opinion, the death was because of injury

No.17, the Appellant is also guilty of having committed offence punishable

under 
Section 376A
 of IPC.

                                                                            50


23.       The injuries suffered by the victim were directly as a result of

sexual assault inflicted upon her.      But the medical evidence does not

disclose that either before or after the commission of sexual assault, any

other injury was consciously caused with the intention to extinguish the

life of the victim. Injury No.17 which was the cause of death was suffered

by the victim during the course of commission of sexual assault upon her.

The questions that arise, therefore, are whether such an act on part of the

Appellant comes within the parameters of 
Sections 299
 and 
300
 of IPC and

whether he is guilty of having committed culpable homicide amounting to

murder.





24.       According to clause fourthly under 
Section 300
 of IPC, the offence

may come under the category of culpable homicide amounting to murder

“if the person committing the act knows that it is so imminently dangerous

that it must, in all probability, cause death or such bodily injury as is likely

to cause death, and commits such act without any excuse for incurring the

risk of causing death or such injury as aforesaid”.


 
The interplay between clauses of 
Sections 299
 and 
300
 of the IPC

was considered by this Court in 
State of Andhra Pradesh vs. Rayavarapu

Punnayya and Another
 as under:-






   (1976) 4 SCC 382

                                                                51

“11. The principal question that falls to be considered in
this appeal is, whether the offence disclosed by the facts
and circumstances established by the prosecution against
the respondent, is “murder” or “culpable homicide” not
amounting to murder.



12. In the scheme of the Penal Code, “culpable homicide”
is genus and “murder” its specie. All “murder” is
“culpable homicide” but not vice-versa. Speaking
generally,     “culpable   homicide”       sans      “special
characteristics of murder”, is “culpable homicide not
amounting to murder”. For the purpose of fixing
punishment, proportionate to the gravity of this generic
offence, the Code practically recognises three degrees of
culpable homicide. The first is, what may be called,
“culpable homicide of the first degree”. This is the greatest
form of culpable homicide, which is defined in Section
300 as “murder”. The second may be termed as “culpable
homicide of the second degree”. This is punishable under
the first part of Section 304. Then, there is “culpable
homicide of the third degree”. This is the lowest type of
culpable homicide and the punishment provided for it is,
also, the lowest among the punishments provided for the
three grades. Culpable homicide of this degree is
punishable under the second part of Section 304.



13. The academic distinction between “murder” and
“culpable homicide not amounting to murder” has vexed
the courts for more than a century. The confusion is
caused, if courts losing sight of the true scope and
meaning of the terms used by the legislature in these
sections, allow themselves to be drawn into minutae
abstractions. The safest way of approach to the
interpretation and application of these provisions seems to
be to keep in focus the keywords used in the various
clauses of Sections 299 and 300. The following
comparative table will be helpful in appreciating the points
of distinction between the two offences.



14. Clause (b) of Section 299 corresponds with clauses (2)
and (3) of Section 300. The distinguishing feature of the
mens rea requisite under clause (2) is the knowledge
possessed by the offender regarding the particular victim
being in such a peculiar condition or state of health that
the internal harm caused to him is likely to be fatal,
notwithstanding the fact that such harm would not in the
ordinary way of nature be sufficient to cause death of a
person in normal health or condition. It is noteworthy that
the “intention to cause death” is not an essential

                                                               52

requirement of clause (2). Only the intention of causing
the bodily injury coupled with the offender’s knowledge of
the likelihood of such injury causing the death of the
particular victim, is sufficient to bring the killing within
the ambit of this clause. This aspect of clause (2) is borne
out by Illustration (b) appended to Section 300.



      Section 299                      Section 300
A person commits             Subject to certain exceptions
culpable homicide if         culpable homicide is murder
the act by which the         if the act by which the death
death is caused is done      is caused is done —
—

                  INTENTION

(a)With the intention of     (1) With the intention of
causing death; or            causing death; or

(b)      With          the   (2) With the intention of
intention of causing         causing such bodily injury as
such bodily injury as is     the offender knows to be
likely to cause death; or    likely to cause the death of
                             the person to whom the harm
                             is caused; or

                             (3) With the intention of
                             causing bodily injury to any
                             person and the bodily injury
                             intended to be inflicted is
                             sufficient in the ordinary
                             course of nature to cause
                             death; or



                  KNOWLEDGE

(c)With the knowledge
that the act is likely to    (4) With the knowledge that
cause death                  the act is so imminently
                             dangerous that it must in all
                             probability cause death or
                             such bodily injury as is likely
                             to cause death, and without
                             any excuse for incurring the
                             risk of causing death or such
                             injury as is mentioned above.

                                                                               53


            15. Clause (b) of Section 299 does not postulate any such
            knowledge on the part of the offender. Instances of cases
            falling under clause (2) of Section 300 can be where the
            assailant causes death by a fist blow intentionally given
            knowing that the victim is suffering from an enlarged liver,
            or enlarged spleen or diseased heart and such blow is
            likely to cause death of that particular person as a result of
            the rupture of the liver, or spleen or the failure of the heart,
            as the case may be. If the assailant had no such knowledge
            about the disease or special frailty of the victim, nor an
            intention to cause death or bodily injury sufficient in the
            ordinary course of nature to cause death, the offence will
            not be murder, even if the injury which caused the death,
            was intentionally given.



            16. In clause (3) of Section 300, instead of the words
            “likely to cause death” occurring in the corresponding
            clause (b) of Section 299, the words “sufficient in the
            ordinary course of nature” have been used. Obviously, the
            distinction lies between a bodily injury likely to cause
            death and a bodily injury sufficient in the ordinary course
            of nature to cause death. The distinction is fine but real,
            and, if overlooked, may result in miscarriage of justice.

            The difference between clause (b) of Section 299 and
            clause (3) of Section 300 is one of the degree of
            probability of death resulting from the intended bodily
            injury. To put it more broadly, it is the degree of
            probability of death which determines whether a culpable
            homicide is of the gravest, medium or the lowest degree.
            The word “likely” in clause (b) of Section 299 conveys the
            sense of “probable” as distinguished from a mere
            possibility. The words “bodily injury … sufficient in the
            ordinary course of nature to cause death” mean that death
            will be the “most probable” result of the injury, having
            regard to the ordinary course of nature.



            17. For cases to fall within clause (3), it is not necessary
            that the offender intended to cause death, so long as the
            death ensues from the intentional bodily injury or injuries
            sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature.
            Rajwant v. State of Kerala is an apt illustration of this
            point.



            18. In Virsa Singh v. State of Punjab Vivian Bose, J.
            speaking for this Court, explained the meaning and scope
            of clause (3), thus (at p. 1500):



   AIR 1966 SC 1874
   AIR 1958 SC 465

                                                                 54


      “The prosecution must prove the following
      facts before it can bring a case under Section
      300, ‘thirdly’. First, it must establish quite
      objectively, that a bodily injury is present;
      secondly the nature of the injury must be
      proved. These          are    purely      objective
      investigations. It must be proved that there was
      an intention to inflict that particular injury, that
      is to say, that it was not accidental or
      unintentional or that some other kind of injury
      was intended. Once these three elements are
      proved to be present, the enquiry proceeds
      further, and fourthly it must be proved that the
      injury of the type just described made up of
      the three elements set out above was sufficient
      to cause death in the ordinary course of nature.
      This part of the enquiry is purely objective and
      inferential and has nothing to do with the
      intention of the offender.”


19. Thus according to the rule laid down in Virsa Singh
case38 of even if the intention of accused was limited to the
infliction of a bodily injury sufficient to cause death in the
ordinary course of nature, and did not extend to the
intention of causing death, the offence would be “murder”.
Illustration (c) appended to Section 300 clearly brings out
this point.



20. Clause (c) of Section 299 and clause (4) of Section 300
both require knowledge of the probability of the act
causing death. It is not necessary for the purpose of this
case to dilate much on the distinction between these
corresponding clauses. It will be sufficient to say that
clause (4) of Section 300 would be applicable where the
knowledge of the offender as to the probability of death of
a person or persons in general — as distinguished from a
particular person or persons — being caused from his
imminently dangerous act, approximates to a practical
certainty. Such knowledge on the part of the offender must
be of the highest degree of probability, the act having been
committed by the offender without any excuse for
incurring the risk of causing death or such injury as
aforesaid.



21. From the above conspectus, it emerges that whenever a
court is confronted with the question whether the offence
is “murder” or “culpable homicide not amounting to
murder”, on the facts of a case, it will be convenient for it

                                                                            55

           to approach the problem in three stages. The question to be
           considered at the first stage would be, whether the accused
           has done an act by doing which he has caused the death of
           another. Proof of such causal connection between the act
           of the accused and the death, leads to the second stage for
           considering whether that act of the accused amounts to
           “culpable homicide” as defined in Section 299. If the
           answer to this question is prima facie found in the
           affirmative, the stage for considering the operation of
           Section 300 of the Penal Code, is reached. This is the stage
           at which the court should determine whether the facts
           proved by the prosecution bring the case within the ambit
           of any of the four clauses of the definition of “murder”
           contained in Section 300. If the answer to this question is
           in the negative the offence would be “culpable homicide
           not amounting to murder”, punishable under the first or
           the second part of Section 304, depending, respectively, on
           whether the second or the third clause of Section 299 is
           applicable. If this question is found in the positive, but the
           case comes within any of the exceptions enumerated in
           Section 300, the offence would still be “culpable homicide
           not amounting to murder”, punishable under the first part
           of Section 304, of the Penal Code.



           22. The above are only broad guidelines and not cast-iron
           imperatives. In most cases, their observance will facilitate
           the task of the court. But sometimes the facts are so
           intertwined and the second and the third stages so
           telescoped into each other, that it may not be convenient to
           give a separate treatment to the matters involved in the
           second and third stages.”



25.      We may now consider the cases where the death may not have been

intended but clause fourthly of 
Section 300
 of IPC was applied to hold the

accused guilty of offence of culpable homicide amounting to murder.


 
A)     In 
State of Madhya Pradesh vs. Ram Prasad
, a woman

was set afire by the accused after pouring kerosene oil on her. A bench of

three Judges of this Court dealt with the matter as under:-


   (1968) 2 SCR 522

                                                                56

“The question then arises, what was the offence which
Ram Prasad can be said to have committed? The offence
of causing injury by burning is a broad spectrum which
runs from s. 324 causing simple injury by burning through
s. 326 namely, causing grievous injury by burning to the
two major offences, namely, culpable homicide not
amounting to murder and even murder itself. The
Sessions Judge chose the lowest end of the spectrum
which is surprising enough, because the burns were so
extensive that they were certainly grievous by all account.
The High Court placed the offence a little higher, namely,
culpable homicide not amounting to murder. We think that
the matter goes a little further than this. As death has been
caused the question has to be considered in the light of
homicide to determine whether the action of Ram Prasad
falls within culpable homicide not amounting to murder or
the higher offence of murder itself. Here we see that death
has actually been caused by the criminal act; in other
words, there has been homicide and since it is not
accidental or suicidal death, responsibility for the
homicide, in the absence of any exceptions or extenuating
circumstances, must be borne by the person who caused it.
The High Court has apparently stopped short by holding
that this was a case of culpable homicide not amounting to
murder. The question is whether the offence falls in any of
the clauses of
 s. 300
 Indian Penal Code. In this
connection it is difficult to say that Ram Prasad intended
causing the death of Mst. Rajji although it might well be
the truth. That he set fire to her clothes after pouring
kerosene oil is a patent fact and therefore the matter has to
be viewed not only with regard to the firstly of s. 300, but
all the other clauses also. We do not wish to consider the
second and the third clauses, because the question then
would arise what was the extent of the injury which Ram
Prasad intended to cause or knew would be caused to Mst.
Rajji. That would be a matter of speculation. In our
opinion, this matter can be disposed of with reference to
clause fourthly of s. 300. That clause reads as follows :-



      “. . . . .culpable homicide is murder. . . . . if the
      person committing the act knows that is so
      imminently dangerous that it must in all
      probability, cause death or such bodily injury
      as is likely to cause death, and commits such
      act without any excuse for incurring the risk or
      causing death or such injury as aforesaid.”

It is obvious that there was no excuse for Ram Prasad to
have taken the risk of causing the death or such bodily
injury as was likely to cause death. The question therefore

                                                                              57

            arises whether Ram Prasad knew that his act was so
            imminently dangerous that it must in all probability cause
            death or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, so
            as to bring the matter within the clause. Although clause
            fourthly is usually invoked in those cases where there is no
            intention to cause the death of any particular person (as the
            illustration shows) the clause may on its terms be used in
            those cases where there is such callousness towards the
            result and the risk taken is such that it may be stated that
            the person knows that the act is likely to cause death or
            such bodily injury as is likely to cause death. In the
            present case, Ram Prasad poured kerosene upon the
            clothes of Mst. Rajji and set fire to those clothes. It is
            obvious that such fire spreads rapidly and burns
            extensively. No special knowledge is needed to know that
            one may cause death by burning if he sets fire to the
            clothes of a person. Therefore, it is obvious that Ram
            Prasad must have known that he was running the risk of
            causing the death of Rajji or such bodily injury as was
            likely to cause her death. As he had no excuse for
            incurring that risk, the offence must be taken to fall within
            4thly of
 s. 300
, Indian Penal Code. 
In other words, his
            offence was culpable homicide amounting to murder even
            if he did not intend causing the death of Mst. Rajji. He
            committed an act so imminently dangerous that it was in
            all probability likely to cause death or to result in an injury
            that was likely to cause death. We are accordingly of the
            opinion that the High Court and the Sessions Judge were
            both wrong in holding that the offence did not fall within
            murder.”
                                                     (Emphasis supplied)


          B)     In a similar fact situation, another bench of three Judges of

    this Court, in Santosh S/o 
Shankar Pawar vs. State of Maharashtra
 

    observed,

            “13. Even assuming that the accused had no intention to
            cause the death of the deceased, the act of the accused falls
            under clause Fourthly of 
Section 300
 IPC that is the act of
            causing injury so imminently dangerous where it will in
            all probability cause death.
 
Any person of average
            intelligence would have the knowledge that pouring of



    (2015) 7 SCC 641

                                                                            58

            kerosene and setting her on fire by throwing a lighted
            matchstick is so imminently dangerous that in all
            probability such an act would cause injuries causing
            death.”


          C)    The principle in Santosh40 was adopted in 
Suraj Jagannath

    Jadhav vs. State of Maharashtra
.




 
D)    In 
State of Haryana vs. Krishan and Another
, where 36

    persons had died after consuming spurious liquor, this Court set aside the

    acquittal ordered by the High Court and restored the order of conviction

    under 
Section 302
 IPC passed by the trial Court. It was observed:-




            “33. Insofar as argument predicated on 
Section 120-B
 IPC
            is concerned, even if we proceed on the basis that charge
            of conspiracy is not proved, it would be suffice to observe
            that adequate evidence is produced showing the
            culpability of the respondents, individually. Once it is
            shown that the spurious liquor was sold from the local
            vends belonging to the respondents coupled with the fact
            that after this tragedy struck, the respondents even tried to
            destroy remaining bottles clearly establishes that the
            respondents had full knowledge of the fact that the bottles
            contain substance methyl and also had full knowledge
            about the disastrous consequences thereof which would
            bring their case within the four corners of Section 300
            Fourthly. The respondents cannot be treated as mere cat’s
            paw and naive. They have exploited the resilient nature of
            bucolic and rustic villagers.”


26.       We may now consider some of the decisions of this Court in which

deaths had occurred because of injuries sustained by the victims during

sexual assault on them.





    (2020) 2 SCC 693
    (2017) 8 SCC 204

                                                                          59


26.1     In State of Orissa vs. Dibakar Naik and Others , a bench of two


Judges of this Court dealt with a case where a lady of 23 years of age was

gang raped and lost her life. The concerned accused were convicted inter

alia under Sections 376 and 302 read with 
Section 34
 of IPC by the trial

Court. However, their conviction and sentence were set aside by the High

Court. The appeals preferred by the State were partly allowed and while

convicting four accused under Sections 376 and 304 II 
IPC
, it was

observed by this Court:-



           “23. However, the nature of the injuries inflicted upon the
           person of the deceased indicate that the accused persons
           had not intended to cause her death. Dr Indramani Jena
           (PW 21) who conducted the post-mortem over the dead
           body of Chhabirani had found the following injuries:



                “(1) One swelling 1" diameter irregularly circular
                over right mastoid process.



                (2) One swelling (which was black in colour) on the
                upper half of right breast 2" in diameter irregular
                circular.



                (3) On dissection I found the following:

                    The swelling in right mastoid area had
                    underlying haematoma. There was fracture of
                    right fourth rib under Injury 2. Right-side chest
                    was filled with blood of about one litre. The right
                    lung was displaced and was injured in anterior
                    surface by fractured rib. Heart chamber was
                    empty, that is, there was no blood.



                (4) Stomach was empty.



                (5) There were two ecchymosis of ¼" in diameter
                each on posterior vaginal wall. The injuries were in
                5 o’clock and 7 o’clock positions.



   (2002) 5 SCC 323

                                                               60


     (6) On examination of the vaginal smear I found
     dead spermatozoa and epithelial cells.



     (7) By the time of my examination, there was
     process of decomposition. Skin denudation had
     started. Tongue was protruded and bitten. There was
     bleeding from right angle of mouth and both ears.
     Abdomen was protruded due to foul gases. Death
     was within 48 hours of the PM examination.”

He has opined that all injuries were ante-mortem. Death
was due to injuries causing internal haemorrhage. There
were signs of forcible sexual intercourse. It was a case of
violent type of intercourse. The injuries found were not in
normal course of sexual intercourse. Any violent assault
even without rape could cause Injuries 1 and 2 and the
corresponding internal injuries. Injury 2 with
corresponding internal injury was sufficient to cause the
death.



24. Whoever causes death by doing an act with the
intention of causing death or with the intention of causing
such bodily injury as is likely to cause death or with the
knowledge that he is likely, by such act, to cause death, is
responsible for the commission of the offence of culpable
homicide. Culpable homicide is murder if the act by which
the death is caused is done with the intention of causing
death and is not covered by any of the exceptions of

Section 300
 of the Indian Penal Code. As already noticed,
in this case there is no evidence to show that the aforesaid
accused persons proved to have been involved in the
occurrence, had intended to cause the offence of murder
within the meaning of Section 300 as punishable under

Section 302
 of the Indian Penal Code. However, on proof
of the commission of offence of gang rape found to have
been committed in a violent manner, they are assumed to
be having the knowledge that by their action it was likely
that the deceased would have died. The aforesaid accused
are, therefore, guilty of the offence, punishable under Part
II of 
Section 304
 of the Indian Penal Code. While
acquitting the other respondents we hold Birabar Mania
(A-5), Babaji Mania (A-6), Bhira Behera @ Baba Tanti
(A-7) and Madha Tanti @ Madhabananda Parmanik (A-

11) guilty for the commission of offences punishable
under Section 304 Part II read with 
Section 34
 of the
Indian Penal Code besides the commission of offence
punishable under Section 376 read with 
Section 34
 of the
Indian Penal Code. The conviction and sentence awarded

                                                                           61

            by the trial court to Birabar Mania (A-5), Babaji Mania
            (A-6), Bhira Behera @ Baba Tanti (A-7) and Madha Tanti
            @ Madhabananda Parmanik (A-11) under 
Section 376
 of
            the Indian Penal Code is upheld. On proof of the offence
            punishable under Section 304 Part II read with 
Section 34

            IPC, the aforesaid accused persons are sentenced to
            undergo rigorous imprisonment for 10 years. Both the
            sentences shall run concurrently”.



                                                   (Emphasis supplied)


       Though it was found that the offence of gang rape was committed

in a violent manner and that the offenders must be having the knowledge

that it was likely that by their action the victim would die, the accused

were not convicted of the offence of culpable homicide amounting to

murder.





26.2      Similarly, in 
State, Govt of NCT of Delhi vs. Sunil and Another
 ,

a girl of 4 years of age was raped by two accused and she lost her life as a

result of injuries sustained during sexual assault. A bench of two Judges

of this Court observed:-




            “23. Thus on consideration of the entire evidence in this
            case we have no doubt that the trial court had come to the
            correct conclusion that the two respondents were the
            rapists who subjected Anuradha to such savage
            ravishment. The Division Bench of the High Court has
            grossly erred in interfering with such a correct conclusion
            made by the trial court as the reasons adopted by the High
            Court for such interference are very tenuous. Nonetheless,
            it is difficult to enter upon a finding that the respondents
            are equally guilty of murder of Anuradha. In the opinion
            of PW 1 doctor the child died “due to intracranial damage


   (2001) 1 SCC 652

                                                                            62

           consequent upon surface force impact to the head”. The
           said opinion was made with reference to the subdural
           haematoma which resulted in subarachnoid haemorrhage.
           Such a consequence happened during the course of the
           violent ravishment committed by either both or by one of
           the rapists without possibly having any intention or even
           knowledge that their action would produce any such
           injury. Even so, the rapists cannot disclaim knowledge that
           the acts done by them on a little infant of such a tender age
           were likely to cause its death. Hence they cannot escape
           conviction from the offence of culpable homicide not
           amounting to murder.



 
24. In the result, we set aside the impugned judgment of
           the High Court. We restore the conviction passed by the
           trial court under Sections 376 and 377 read with 
Section
           34
 IPC. The trial court awarded the maximum sentence to
           the respondents under the said counts i.e. imprisonment
           for life. The fact-situation in this case does not justify any
           reduction of that sentence. We also convict the
           respondents under Section 304 Part II, read with 
Section
           34
 IPC though it is unnecessary to award any sentence
           thereunder in view of the sentence of imprisonment for
           life awarded to the respondents under the other two
           counts.”


26.3     In 
Amrit Singh vs. State of Punjab
, a girl of 7-8 years died as a

result of excessive bleeding from her private parts because of sexual

assault on her. The accused was found guilty of offences under Sections

302 and 376 and was awarded death sentence. A bench of two Judges of

this Court observed:-




           “21. The opinion of the learned trial Judge as also the
           High Court that the appellant being aged about 31 years
           and not suffering from any disease, was in a dominating
           position and might have got her mouth gagged cannot be
           held to be irrelevant. Some marks of violence not only on
           the neck but also on her mouth were found. Submission of
           Mr Agarwal, however, that the appellant might not have an


   (2006) 12 SCC 79

                                                                                 63

              intention to kill the deceased, thus, may have some force.
              The death occurred not as a result of strangulation but
              because of excessive bleeding. The deceased had bleed
              half a litre of blood. Dr. Reshamchand Singh, PW 1 did
              not state that injury on the neck could have contributed to
              her death. The death occurred, therefore, as a consequence
              of and not because of any specific overt act on the part of
              the appellant.”


        This Court commuted the sentence to life imprisonment.



26.4    A bench of two Judges of this Court relied upon the decision in


State of Orissa v. Dibakar Naik43
 and affirmed the conviction and

sentence under Sections 376 and 304 II 
IPC
 in 
State of AP                   v.   T.

Prasanna Kumar
.




26.5    On the other hand, in following four cases, two Judge benches of

this Court affirmed the conviction and sentence under 
Sections 302
 and


376
 IPC where the victims, aged between 1½ to 8 years had lost their

lives as a result of injuries sustained during sexual assault on them.



 
i)        Mohd. Chaman vs. State (NCT of Delhi
)
                  Age of the Victim : 1½ years


        ii)       Ramesh Harijan vs. State of Uttar Pradesh
                  Age of the Victim : 5-6 years


        iii)      Ram Deo Prasad vs. State of Bihar
                  Age of the Victim : 4 years



   (2003) 1 ACR 627 (SC) = JT 2002 (7) SC 635
   (2001) 2 SCC 28
   (2012) 5 SCC 777
   (2013) 7 SCC 725

                                                                         64


 
iv)   Ramesh vs. State
 through Inspector of Police
                Age of the Victim : 8 years

          However, there is no discussion on the point in these cases.


26.6      Recently, a three Judge bench of this Court in 
Dattatraya Ambo

Rokade vs. The State of Maharashtra
  had an occasion to consider where

a girl of 5 years was subjected to sexual assault. She died as a result of

injuries 1 to 5 suffered during the course of sexual assault on her. The

conviction of the accused inter alia under 
Sections 302
, 
376(2)(f)
 of IPC

and under the provisions of 
POCSO Act
 was affirmed by this Court and it

was observed:-




            “125. As a mature man, over fifty years of age, the
            Accused-Appellant should have known that the rape of a
            five year old child by an adult was dangerous and could
            lead to such injuries, as was in all probability likely to
            cause death.”



27.       The guiding principles were summed up in 
State of Madhya

Pradesh v. Ram Prasad39
 to the effect that even if there be no intention to

cause death, “if there is such callousness towards the result and the risk

taken is such that it may be stated that the person knows that the act is

likely to cause death or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death”

clause fourthly of 
Section 300
 IPC will get attracted and that the offender

must be taken to have known that he was running the risk of causing the


     (2014) 9 SCC 392
     (2019) 13 SCALE 187

                                                                        65

death or such bodily injury as was likely to cause the death of the victim.


Same principle is discernible from the decision of this Court in 
Dattatraya

Ambo Rokade v. State of Maharashtra51
.






28.    Considering the age of the victim in the present case, the accused

must have known the consequence that his sexual assault on a child of 2 ½

years would cause death or such bodily injury as was likely to cause her

death. The instant matter thus comes within the parameters of clause

fourthly to 
Section 300
 IPC and the question posed at the beginning of the

discussion on this issue must be answered against the Appellant. The

Appellant is therefore guilty of having committed the offence of culpable

homicide amounting to murder.





29.    It must be observed at this stage that the decisions of this Court

referred to in paragraphs 26.1, 26.2 and 26.4 hereinabove failed to consider

the effect of clause fourthly to 
Section 300
 IPC.


30.    Before we turn to the submissions on sentence advanced by Ms.

Mathur, learned Senior Advocate, it needs to be noted that about 67 cases

were dealt with by this Court in last 40 years since the decision of this

Court in Bachan Singh8, where i) the alleged offences were under 
Sections

376
 and 
302
 IPC; and ii) the ages of the victims were 16 years or below.

The Cases are:-

                                                                                                 66


S.    Judgement           Bench      Age of        Cause of Death of        Whether    Sentence
No    Reported at         Strength   the           the Victim               Death      lesser than
      Cause Title                    Victim        Accused Convicted        Sentence   Death
                                                   under Sections           Imposed?   Sentence


1.    (1981) 3 SCC        3 Judges   16 years      Injury to Neck with      Yes
      324                                          Kirpan
      Kuljeet Singh @                              S.302 r/w S.34 IPC
      Ranga v. Union                               Ss. 363, 365, 366 and
      of India                                     376 r/w S. 34 IPC

2.    (1991) 1 SCC        2 Judges   6 years       Strangulation            Yes
      752                                          Ss. 302, 376 IPC
      Jumman Khan v.

      State of U.P.

3.    (1994) 3 SCC        2 Judges   7 years       Asphyxia by              Yes
      381                                          throttling
      
Laxman Naik v.                               Ss.
 376, 302 
IPC

      State of Orissa


4.    (1996) 6 SCC        2 Judges   7 years       Strangulation            Yes
      250                                          Ss. 363, 376, 302 and
      Kamta Tiwari v.                              201 IPC
      State of M.P.

5.    (1997) 1 SCC        2 Judges   16 years      Throttling                          Life
      272                                          Ss.302, 376 IPC
      State of A.P. v.

      Gangula Satya
      Murthy



6.    (1999) 4 SCC        2 Judges   14 years      Strangulation                       Life
      108                                          Ss.376, 302 
IPC

      Kumudi Lal v.                                
S. 3(ii)(v)
 of the
      State of U.P.                                SC&ST Act, 1989


7.    (1999) 6 SCC 60     2 Judges   Age not       Asphyxia                            Life
      Akhtar vs. State               specified     Ss. 302, 376 IPC
      of U.P.


8.    (1999) 9 SCC        3 Judges   16 years      Strangulation            Yes
      581                                          Ss. 376(2)(g), 302/34
      Molai v. State of                            and 201 IPC
      M.P.

9.    (2000) 1 SCC        2 Judges   4 years       Smothering                          Life
      471                                          Ss.302,376 
IPC

      State          of
      Maharashtra v.

      
Suresh
10    (2001) 1 SCC        2 Judges   4 years       Intracranial damage                 Life
.     652                                          consequent to surface
      State, Govt. of                              force impact to the
      NCT of Delhi v.                              head,         subdural
      Sunil                                        haematoma causing
                                                   subarachnoid
                                                   haemorrhage
                                                   Ss. 376 and 377 r/w
                                                   
S.34
, S. 304 Part II
                                                   r/w
 S. 34
 IPC
11.   (2001) 2 SCC 28     2 Judges   1         ½   Haemorrhagic shock                  Life

                                                                                               67

     Mohd. Chaman v.                  years         consequent to liver
     State (NCT of                                  injury inflicted in the
     Delhi)                                         process of committing
                                                    rape
                                                    Ss. 302 and 376 
IPC

12   (2001) 9 SCC 50       2 Judges   11 years      Shock               and         Life
.    Raju v. State of                               haemorrhage as a
     Haryana                                        result of injuries
                                                    (Blows by brick to the
                                                    head and mouth)
                                                    Ss. 302, 376, 363 
IPC

13   (2001) 9 SCC          2 Judges   6 years       Pressing nose and               Life
.    615                                            mouth and obstructing
     
Bantu v. State
 of                              breath
     M.P.                                           Ss. 302, 376 
IPC

14   (2002) 1 SCC          2 Judges   3 years       Massive        cerebral         Life
.    622                                            haemorrhage resulting
     State            of                            from the head injury
     Maharashtra v.                                 Ss. 302, 376, 201 
IPC

     Bharat      Fakira
     Dhiwar
15   (2002) 1 SCC          2 Judges   11 years      Throttling                      Life
.    731                                            Ss. 376(2)(f), 302 and
     Ganesh Lal v.                                  404 
IPC

     State            of
     Rajasthan
16   JT 2002 (7) SC        2 Judges   16 years      Suffocation                     10     years
.    635                                            Ss. 304(Part II)/376            RI
     State of A.P. v. T.                            
IPC

     Prasanna Kumar
17   (2003) 10 SCC         3 Judges   14 years      Strangulation                   Life
.    185                                            Ss. 302, 376 
IPC

     Subramani        v.
     State

18   (2003) 8 SCC 93       2 Judges   11-12         
Strangulation                   Life
.    Amit v. State
 of                 years         Ss. 302, 376 
IPC

     Maharashtra
19   (2004) 10 SCC         2 Judges   10 years      Throttling                      Life
.    616                                            Ss. 302, 376 and 201
     State of U.P. v.                               
IPC

     Devendra Singh

20   2005 (3) SCC          2 Judges   --            --                              Life
.    131                                            Ss. 302, 376, 201 
IPC

     State       of
     Maharashtra v.
     Mansingh

21   (2005) 3 SCC          2 Judges   Less          Smothering                Yes
.    114                              than      6   Ss. 302, 363, 366,
     State of U.P. v.                 years         376(2)(f), 201 
IPC

     Satish

22   (2005) 3 SCC          2 Judges   Minor         Asphyxia                        Life
.    127                                            Ss. 363, 376 and 302
     Surendra       Pal                             
IPC

     Shivbalakpal v.
     State of Gujarat

                                                                                          68


23   (2006) 9 SCC         2 Judges   10 years    Strangulation                   Life
.    278                                         Ss. 302, 376 
IPC

     State of U.P. v.
     Desh Raj
24   (2006) 12 SCC        2 Judges   7/8 years   Bleeding from vulva             Life
.    79                                          as a result of rape
     Amrit Singh v.                              Ss. 376 and 302 
IPC

     State of Punjab
25   (2007) 11 SCC        2 Judges   7/8 years   Asphyxia      resulting         Life
.    467                                         from inhalation of
     Bishnu     Prasad                           semisolid       watery
     
Sinha v. State
 of                           substances
     Assam                                       Ss. 376(2)(g), 302 and
                                                 201 r/w
 S. 34
 IPC
26   (2008) 7 SCC         3 Judges   5 years     Strangulation             Yes   Refer   to
.    561                             10 years    Ss. 363, 376, 302 and           26A.

     
Accused “X” v.                              201 
IPC

     State          of
     Maharashtra
26   (2019) 7 SCC 1       3 Judges   5 years     Strangulation                   Commuted
A.   Accused “X” v.                  10 years    Ss. 363, 376, 302 and           to    Life
     State          of                           201 
IPC
                         Sentence
     Maharashtra
27   (2008) 11 SCC        2 Judges   5 years     Shock               and   Yes
.    113                                         haemorrhage as a
     
Bantu v. State
 of                           result of injuries due
     U.P.                                        to insertion of the
                                                 wooden stick into the
                                                 vagina
                                                 Ss. 364, 376 and 302
                                                 
IPC

28   (2008) 15 SCC        2 Judges   9 years     Strangulation             Yes
.    269                                         Ss. 302, 376(2)(f) 
IPC

     Shivaji @ Dadya
     Shankar Alhat v.
     State         of
     Maharashtra

29   (2009) 15 SCC        3 Judges   6 years     Strangulation                   Life
.    259                                         Ss. 302/34, 
Ss. 376,
     Pawan v. State
 of                           377, Ss. 201/34 
IPC

     Uttaranchal

30   (2010) 1 SCC 58      2 Judges   2 years     Combined effects of             Life
.    Sebastian v. State                          drowning and blunt
     of Kerala                                   injuries     sustained
                                                 around nose and
                                                 mouth
                                                 Ss. 302, 364, 369,
                                                 376(2)(f), 392, 449
                                                 
IPC

31   (2010) 2 SCC         2 Judges   5 years     
Strangulation                   Life
.    583                                         Ss. 302, 376, 201 
IPC

     Aftab     Ahmad
     Anasari v. State
     of Uttaranchal

32   (2011) 2 SCC         3 Judges   Class IV    Neurogenic       shock          Life
.    764                             student –   because of      sexual

                                                                                         69

     Rameshbhai                     aged 10    intercourse         and
     Chandubhai                     years      multiple injuries.

     Rathod (2) v.                             Ss. 363, 366, 376,
     State of Gujarat                          302, 397 
IPC

33   (2011) 5 SCC        2 Judges   7 years    Asphyxia            and    Yes   Refer   to
.    317                                       haemorrhage as a                 33A.
     
Mohd. Mannan v.                           result of strangulation
     State of Bihar                            Ss. 366, 376, 201, 302
                                               
IPC

33   (2019) 16 SCC       3 Judges   7 years    Asphyxia            and          Commuted
A.   584                                       haemorrhage as a                 to    Life
     Mohd. Mannan v.                           result of strangulation          Sentence
     State of Bihar                            Ss. 366, 376, 201, 302
                                               
IPC

34   (2011) 4 SCC 80     2 Judges   Many       Cooked, body parts         Yes
.    Surendra Koli v.               Children   consumed
     State of U.P.                             Ss. 302, 364, 376 
IPC

35   (2011) 15 SCC       2 Judges   5 years    Asphyxia                         Life
.    352                                       Ss. 302, 376 
IPC

     Purna    Chandra
     Kusal v. State of
     Orissa
36   (2011) 12 SCC       2 Judges   10 years   Strangulation                    Life
.    56         Haresh                         Ss. 302, 376 
IPC

     Mohandas Rajput
     v.    State    of
     Maharashtra
37   (2012) 4 SCC        2 Judges   3 years    Been hit on her head             Life
.    107                                       and her left side of the
     
Amit v. State
 of                          face,     strangulated,
     U.P.                                      unnatural offence and
                                               rape was committed
                                               on her
                                               Ss. 364, 376, 377, 302
                                               and 201 
IPC

38   (2013) 9 SCC        2 Judges   10 years   --                               Life
.    795                                       Ss. 376(2) and 302
     Chhote Lal v.
     State of M.P.
39   (2012) 5 SCC        2 Judges   4 years    Asphyxia because of              Life
.    766                                       throttling
     Neel Kumar v.                             Ss. 302/376(2)(f) and

     State of Haryana                          201

40   (2012) 5 SCC        2 Judges   5-6        Shock              and           Life
.    777                            years      haemorrhage as a
     Ramesh Harijan                            result of ante-mortem
     v. State of U.P.                          vaginal injuries.
                                               Ss. 302, 376
41   (2012) 4 SCC 37     2 Judges   3 years    Cause of death was         Yes   Refer   to
.    Rajendra                                  rape and asphyxia                41A.

     Pralhadrao Wasnik                         Ss. 376(2)(f), 377 and
     v.     State   of                         302 
IPC

     Maharashtra

41   (2019) 12 SCC       2 Judges   3 years    Cause of death was               Commuted
A.   460                                       rape and asphyxia                to    Life
     Rajendra                                  Ss. 376(2)(f), 377 and           Sentence
     Pralhadrao                                302 
IPC

     Wasnik v. State

                                                                                70

     of Maharashtra

42   (2012) 7 SCC        2 Judges   Not        Death caused by rape,     Life
.    699                            given      strangulation
     Kashinath                                 Ss. 376 and 302 
IPC

     Mondal v. State
     of W.B.


43   (2012) 9 SCC        2 Judges   11 years   Asphyxia due to           Life
.    742                                       strangulation and also
     State of U.P. v.                          due to pre-mordial
     Munesh                                    injuries
                                               Ss. 302, 376 
IPC


44   (2013) 5 SCC        2 Judges   11 years   Asphyxia due to           Life
.    546                                       strangulation
     Shankar Kisanrao                          Ss. 302, 376, 366-A
     Khade v. State of                         and 363 r/w
 S.34
 IPC
     Maharashtra


45   (2013) 7 SCC        2 Judges   4 years    Excessive                 Life
.    725                                       haemorrhage leading
     Ram Deo Prasad                            to shock from ante-
     v. State of Bihar                         mortem         injuries
                                               around genitalia and
                                               private parts by some
                                               sexual offences
                                               Ss. 376, 302 
IPC



46   (2013) 10 SCC       2 Judges   Below 5    Asphyxia due to           Life
.    721                            years      strangulation
     State       of                            Ss. 302, 376, 201 
IPC

     Rajasthan   v.
     Jamil Khan


47   (2014) 5 SCC        2 Judges   14 years   Asphyxia as a result      Life
.    353                                       of strangulation
     Rajkumar v. State                         Ss. 302, 376, 450 
IPC

     of      Madhya
     Pradesh


48   (2014) 9 SCC        2 Judges   8 years    Neurogenic shock due      Life
.    392                                       to rape
     Ramesh v. State                           Ss. 376, 302, 201 
IPC


49   (2014) 12 SCC       3 Judges   9 years    Injury on the head        Life
.    274                                       (from a cot)
     Selvam v. State                           Ss. 302, 376, 379 and
                                               201 
IPC





50   (2015)   2   SCC    2 Judges   10 years   Throttling                Life

                                                                                               71

.    783                                       Ss. 376, 302 and 201
     Duryodhan Rout                            
IPC

     v. State of Orissa
51   (2015) 1 SCC         3 Judges   4 years   Cause of death was        Yes
.    253                                       head            injury,   Also refer
     Vasanta Sampat                            associated with the       to 51A.
     
Dupare v. State
                           injury on the genital
     of Maharashtra                            region
                                               Ss. 302, 376(2)(f),
                                               363, 367, 201 
IPC

51   (2017) 6 SCC         3 Judges   4 years   Cause of death was        Confirms
A.   631                                       head            injury,   Death
     Vasanta Sampat                            associated with the       Penalty
     Dupare v. State                           injury on the genital
     of Maharashtra                            region
                                               Ss. 302, 376(2)(f),
                                               363, 367, 201 
IPC

52   (2015) 2 SCC         2 Judges   7 years   Homicidal death on                     Convicted
.    775                                       account of injury on                   but
     Darga Ram v.                              head                                   Sentence
     State          of                         Ss. 376, 302 
IPC
                       set aside
     Rajasthan                                                                        (Juvenile)
53   (2015) 16 SCC        3 Judges   4 years   Extensive injuries at                  Life
.    492                                       neck and other vital
     Kalu Khan v.                              parts of the body
     State          of                         Ss. 363, 364, 376(2)
     Rajasthan                                 (f), 302, 201 
IPC

54   (2016) 3 SCC 19      2 Judges   Not       Burn injuries                          Life
.    State of Assam v.               Estd.
     
Ss. 376, 302, 454 
IPC

     Ramen Dowarah                   (Young)
55   (2016) 9 SCC         2 Judges   Not       Face crushed with                      Life
.    325                             mention   stones
     Kadamanian v.                   ed        (Corresponding
     State                                     injuries on head)
                                               Ss. 302, 376, 404, 201
                                               
IPC

56   (2016) 9 SCC         3 Judges   7 years   Asphyxia          from                 Life
.    675                                       choking out the throat
     Tattu Lodhi v.                            by strangulation of
     State of Madhya                           the neck
     Pradesh                                   Ss.       302,364,363,
                                               376(2)(f)/511 & 201
                                               
IPC

57   (2017) 4 SCC         3 Judges   4 years   Strangulation/Asphyx                   Life
.    393                                       ia
     
Sunil v. State of                         Ss.
 302, 363, 367,
     Madhya Pradesh                            376(2)(f) 
IPC

58   (2019) 8 SCC         3 Judges   5 years   Ante-mortem                            Life
.    371                                       drowning
     Sachin    Kumar                           Ss. 376-A, 302 and
     Singhraha      v.                         201 Part II 
IPC

     State of Madhya                           Ss.5 (i) and 5(m) r/w
     Pradesh                                   S.6 of POCSO Act
59   (2019) 13 SCC        3 Judges   Not       Head injury with                       Life
.    640                             mention   compression of neck
     Babasaheb                       ed        Ss. 302, 376(2)(f),
     Maruti Kamble v.                          342 
IPC

     State          of
     Maharashtra

                                                                                             72

60   (2019) 16 SCC        3 Judges   9 years    Drowning                              Life
.    380                                        Ss. 302, 376(2)(f) and
     Raju      Jagdish                          201 
IPC

     Paswan v. State
     of Maharashtra
61   (2019) 16 SCC        3 Judges   8 years    --                                    Life
.    278                                        Ss. 302, 363, 366 and
     Nand Kishore v.                            376(2)(i) 
IPC

     State of Madhya
     Pradesh
62   (2019) 4 SCC         3 Judges   7     ½    Asphyxia due to                       Life
.    210                             years      throttling
     Vijay Raikwar v.                           Ss. 376(2)(f), 201 
IPC

     State of M.P.                              Ss.5(i), 5(m) and 5(r)
                                                r/w
 S.6
 POCSO Act
63   (2019) 8 SCC         3 Judges   Minor      Asphyxia as a result                  Life
.    382                                        of strangulation
     Parsuram v. State                          Ss. 302, 376
     of M.P.
64   2019         (13)    3 Judges   5 years    Asphyxia due to                       Life
.    SCALE 187                                  smothering,
     Dattatraya     v.                          associated with head
     State          of                          injuries and sexual
     Maharashtra                                assault
                                                Ss. 302, 376(2)(f),
                                                377 
IPC
 r/w Ss. 3, 4
                                                and 5 POCSO
65   (2019) 7 SCC                    10 years   Drowning                 Yes
.    716                  3 Judges              Ss.     376(2)(f)   &    Also refer
     Manoharan       v.                         376(2)(g), 302, 201      to 65A.

     State                                      IPC
65   2019          (14)   3 Judges   10 years   Drowning                 Confirms
A.   SCALE 800                                  Ss.     376(2)(f)   &    Death
     Manoharan       v.                         376(2)(g), 302, 201      Penalty
     State                                      IPC
66   (2019) 9 SCC         3 Judges   2 years    Throttling               Yes
.    622                                        Ss. 302, 363, 376, 377
     Ravi S/o Ashok                             IPC
     Ghumare v. State
     of Maharashtra
67   (2019) 9 SCC         3 Judges   13 years   Throttling                            Yes
.    689                                        Ss. 363, 366, 376(2)
     Ravishankar v.                             (i), 376(2)(n), 376(2)
     State of M.P.                              (j), 376(2)(m), 376-A,
                                                302 and 201 IPC



 
Out of these 67 cases, this Court affirmed the award of death

sentence to the accused in 15 cases. In three (at Sr. Nos. 26A, 33A and

41A) out of said 15 cases, the death sentence was commuted to life

sentence by this Court in Review Petitions. Out of remaining 12 cases, in

                                                                          73

two cases (where Review Petitions were heard in open Court in terms of

law laid down in Mohd. Arif alias 
Ashfaq vs. Registrar
, Supreme Court

of India) namely in cases at Sr. Nos. 51A and 65A, the death sentence

was confirmed by this Court and the Review Petitions were dismissed.

Thus, as on date, the death sentence stands confirmed in 12 out of 67 cases

where the principal offences allegedly committed were under 
Sections 376


and 
302
 IPC and where the victims were aged about 16 years or below.


         Out of these 67 cases, at least in 51 cases the victims were aged

below 12 years. In 12 out of those 51 cases, the death sentence was

initially awarded. However, in 3 cases (at Sr. Nos. 26A, 33A and 41A) the

death sentence was commuted to life sentence in Review.


         In 2 out of aforesaid 67 cases (at Sr. Nos. 58 and 67), the offences

were committed on 23.02.2015 and 22.05.2015 respectively i.e., after the

Amendment Act received the assent of the President and was published on

02.04.2013 (but given retrospective effect from 03.02.2013).             The

conviction was also under 
Section 376A
 of IPC and the evidence showed

specific acts such as drowning the victim or throttling her. In the first

case, the age of the victim was 5 years while in the second case the victim

was aged 13 years. In the first case the sentence imposed by this Court




   (2014) 9 SCC 737

                                                                            74

was 25 years of imprisonment without remission while in the second, the

life sentence for the remainder of the life of the accused, was imposed.


31.      We now turn to the first submission advanced by Ms. Mathur,

learned Senior Advocate on the issue of sentence. Section 235 (2) of the

Code mandates that the accused must be heard on sentence. In the instant

case the order of sentence was made on the same day the order of

conviction was pronounced. 
In 
Santa Singh v. State of Punjab
  the

accused was convicted and sentenced to death by one single judgment and

thus a bench of two judges of this Court found that there was infraction of

Section 235 (2) of the Code. The sentence of death was therefore set aside

and the matter was remanded to the Sessions Court.
 
Whether, for non-

compliance of Section 235 (2) of the Code, the matter be remanded in the

light of the decision in 
Santa Singh v. State of Punjab53
 was thereafter

considered by a bench of three judges of this Court in 
Dagdu v. State of

Maharashtra
. Chandrachud, CJ. who delivered the leading judgment,

observed: -




 
“79. But we are unable to read the judgment in Santa
            Singh as laying down that the failure on the part of the
            Court, which convicts an accused, to hear him on the
            question of sentence must necessarily entail a remand to
            that Court in order to afford to the accused an opportunity
            to be heard on the question us sentence. The Court, on
            convicting an accused, must unquestionably hear him on
            the question of sentence. But if, for any reason, it omits to
            do so and the accused makes a grievance of it in the higher
   (1976) 4 SCC 190
   (1977) 3 SCC 68

                                                                         75

          court, it would be open to that Court to remedy the breach
          by giving a hearing to the accused on the question of
          sentence. That opportunity has to be real and effective,
          which means that the accused must be permitted to adduce
          before the Court all the data which he desires to adduce on
          the question of sentence. The accused may exercise that
          right either by instructing his counsel to make oral
          submissions to the Court or he may, on affidavit or
          otherwise, place in writing before the Court whatever he
          desires to place before it on the question of sentence. The
          Court may, in appropriate cases, have to adjourn the matter
          in order to give to the accused sufficient time to produce
          the necessary data and to make his contentions on the
          question of sentence. That, perhaps, must inevitably
          happen where the conviction is recorded for the first time
          by a higher court.”



      Goswami, J., authored a concurring opinion, the relevant part of

which was quoted in 
B. A. Umesh v. High
 Court of Karnataka31.




32.    
In 
Allauddin Mian v. State of Bihar
 11, the order of sentence was

passed on the same day the order of conviction was pronounced and a

bench of two judges of this Court commuted the sentence of death to life

imprisonment.
 In Malkiat Singh v. Stat of Punjab12, a bench of three

judges of this Court did not deem it appropriate to remand the matter for

hearing the accused on sentence after six years and commuted the sentence

of death to life imprisonment. 
In 
Ajay Pandit v. State of Maharashtra
 13, a

bench of two judges of this Court found that the opportunity afforded to

the accused in terms of Section 235 (2)               of the Code was purely

mechanical and no genuine efforts were made to elicit any information

either from the accused or from the prosecution as to whether any

                                                                             76

      circumstances existed which might influence the High Court to avoid

      award of death sentence.






      33.     
In 
B. A. Umesh v. High
 Court of Karnataka 31, a bench of three

      judges of this Court considered the decisions on the point including the

      question whether the matter was required to be remanded to hear the

      accused on sentence. Paragraphs 11 to 13 of the decision were as under :-


                “11. In Dagdu v. State of Maharashtra54 Goswami, J.
                observes as under:



 
“90. I would particularly emphasise that there
                       is no mandatory direction for remanding any
                       case in 
Santa Singh v. State of Punjab53
 nor is
                       remand the inevitable recipe of 
Section 235(2)
,
                       Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. Whenever
                       an appeal court finds that the mandate of
                       
Section 235(2)
 CrPC for a hearing on sentence
                       had not been complied with, it, at once,
                       becomes the duty of the appeal court to offer
                       to the accused an adequate opportunity to
                       produce before it whatever materials he
                       chooses in whatever reasonable way possible.
                       Courts should avoid laws’ delay and
                       necessarily inconsequential remands when the
                       accused can secure full benefit of 
Section
                       235(2)
 CrPC even in the appeal court, in the
                       High Court or even in this Court. We have
                       unanimously adopted this very course in these
                       appeals.”


                12. In another three-Judge Bench case in Tarlok Singh v.

                State of Punjab, at para 4, Krishna Iyer, J. writes:


                       “4. 
In 
Santa Singh v. State of Punjab53
 this
                       Court considering 
Section 235(2)
 CrPC held
                       that the hearing contemplated by that sub-
                       section is not confined merely to hearing oral
                       submissions but extends to giving an

   (1977) 3 SCC 218

                                                                       77

                 opportunity to the prosecution and the accused
                 to place before the court facts and materials
                 relating to the various factors bearing on the
                 question of sentence and, if they are contested
                 by either side, then to produce evidence for the
                 purpose of establishing the same. Of course, in
                 that particular case this Court sent the case
                 back to the Sessions Court for complying with
                 
Section 235(2)
 CrPC. It may well be that in
                 many cases sending the case back to the
                 Sessions Court may lead to more expense,
                 delay and prejudice to the cause of justice. In
                 such cases, it may be more appropriate for the
                 appellate court to give an opportunity to the
                 parties in terms of Section 235(2) to produce
                 the materials they wish to adduce instead of
                 going through the exercise of sending the case
                 back to the trial court. This may, in many
                 cases, save time and help produce prompt
                 justice.”


           13. 
In 
Deepak Rai v. State of Bihar
, yet another three-


           Judge Bench case, Dattu, J. observes in para 54 as under:


 
“54. Herein, it is not the case of the appellants
                 that the opportunity to be heard on the
                 question of sentence separately as provisioned
                 for under Section 235(2) of the Code was not
                 provided by the courts below. Further, the trial
                 court has recorded and discussed the
                 submissions made by the appellants and the
                 prosecution on the said question and thereafter,
                 rejected the possibility of awarding a
                 punishment less harsh than the death penalty.
                 However, the High Court while confirming the
                 sentence has recorded reasons though
                 encapsulated. The High Court has noticed the
                 motive of the appellants being non-withdrawal
                 of the case by the informant and the ghastly
                 manner of commission of crime whereby six
                 innocent persons as young as 3-year old were
                 charred to death and concluded that the
                 incident shocks the conscience of the entire
                 society and thus deserves nothing lesser but
                 death penalty.” ”


   (2013) 10 SCC 421
   
State of Bihar v. Deepak Rai
, 2010 SCC OnLine Pat 949


                                                                                 78


 
34.      Subsequently, the issue was again considered in 
Vasanta Sampat

     Dupare v. State of Maharashtra32
 and after referring to the decisions of

     this Court including those rendered in 
Allauddin Mian v. State of Bihar
 11,

     
Malkiat Singh v. State of Punjab12
 and 
B. A. Umesh v. High
 Court of

     Karnataka31, a bench of three judges of this Court observed : -


 
“16. This Court then relied on the principle 
laid down in


Dagdu v. State of Maharashtra54
 which was followed
                subsequently by another Bench of three learned Judges in
                
Tarlok Singh v. State of Punjab55
. In the circumstances,
                merely because no separate date was given for hearing on
                sentence, we cannot find the entire exercise to be flawed
                or vitiated.
 
Since we had allowed the petitioner to place
                the relevant material on record in the light of the principles
                
laid down in
 
Dagdu v. State of Maharashtra54
 we will
                proceed to consider the material so placed on record and
                weigh these factors and the aggravating circumstances as
                found by the Court in the judgment under review.”

              Recently, in 
Manoj Suryavanshi vs. State of Chhattisgarh
 , a

     bench of three Judges of this Court, after considering the relevant decisions

     on the point, concluded:-




 
“27.2. Thus, there is no absolute proposition of law that in
                no case there can be conviction and sentence on the same
                day. There is no absolute proposition of law 
laid down by

                this Court in any of the decisions that if the sentence is
                awarded on the very same day on which the conviction
                was recorded, the sentencing would be vitiated.”




          (2020) 4 SCC 451


                                                                         79

      Thus, merely on account of infraction of Section 235 (2) of the Code,

the death sentence ought not to be commuted to life imprisonment.
 
In any

case we have afforded adequate and sufficient opportunity to the

Appellant to place all the relevant materials on record in the light of

principle 
laid down in
 
Dagdu v. State of Maharashtra54
.




35.      Before we deal with the second submission on sentence, it must be

observed that as 
laid down by
 this Court in 
Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v.

State of Maharashtra34
, a case based on circumstantial evidence has to

face strict scrutiny. Every circumstance from which conclusion of guilt is

to be drawn must be fully established; the circumstances should be

conclusive in nature and tendency; they must form a chain of evidence so

complete as not to leave any reasonable ground for a conclusion consistent

with the innocence of the accused; and such chain of circumstances must

be consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused and must

exclude every possible hypothesis except the one sought to be proved by

the prosecution.
 
The decision in 
Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of

Maharashtra34
 had noted the consistent view on the point including the

decision of this Court in 
Hanumant v. State of Madhya Pradesh
  in which

a bench of three judges of this Court had ruled:-


           “It is well to remember that in cases where the evidence is
           of a circumstantial nature, the circumstances from which
   (1952) SCR 1091

                                                                           80

            the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should in the first
            instance be fully established, and all the facts so
            established should be consistent only with the hypothesis
            of the guilt of the accused. Again, the circumstances
            should be of a conclusive nature and tendency and they
            should be such as to exclude every hypothesis but the one
            proposed to be proved. 
In other words, there must be a
            chain of evidence so far complete as not to leave any
            reasonable ground for a conclusion consistent with the
            innocence of the accused and it must be such as to show
            that within all human probability the act must have been
            done by the accused.”

        Secondly, on the issue as to what should be the approach in the

matter of sentence, a bench of three judges of this Court in 
Vadivelu

Thevar v. State of Madras
 stated:-




            “Lastly, it was urged that assuming that the court was
            inclined to act upon the testimony of the first witness and
            to record a conviction for murder as against the first
            appellant, the court should not impose the extreme penalty
            of law and in the state of the record as it is, the lesser
            punishment provided by law should be deemed to meet the
            ends of justice. We cannot accede to this line of argument.
            The first question which the court has to consider in a case
            like this, is whether the accused has been proved, to the
            satisfaction of the court, to have committed the crime. If
            the court is convinced about the truth of the prosecution
            story, conviction has to follow. The question of sentence
            has to be determined, not with reference to the volume or
            character of the evidence adduced by the prosecution in
            support of the prosecution case, but with reference to the
            fact whether there are any extenuating circumstances
            which can be said to mitigate the enormity of the crime. If
            the court is satisfied that there are such mitigating
            circumstances, only then, it would be justified in imposing
            the lesser of the two sentences provided by law. In other
            words, the nature of the proof has nothing to with the
            character of the punishment. The nature of the proof can
            only bear upon the question of conviction - whether or not
            the accused has been proved to be guilty. If the court
            comes to the conclusion that the guilt has been brought
            home to the accused, and conviction follows, the process
            of proof is at an end. The question as to what punishment

   (1957) SCR 981 – This was, however, not a case of death sentence.

                                                                          81


            should be imposed is for the court to decide in all the
            circumstances of the case with particular reference to any
            extenuating circumstances. But the nature of proof, as we
            have indicated, has nothing to do with the question of
            punishment. In this case, there are no such extenuating
            circumstances which can be legitimately urged in support
            of the view that the lesser penalty under
 s. 302
 of the
            Indian Penal Code, should meet the ends of justice. It was
            a cold-blooded murder. The accused came for the second
            time, determined to see that their victim did not possibly
            escape the assassins' hands.”
                                                     (Emphasis added)



         It was laid down that the question of sentence must be determined

not with reference to the volume or character of the evidence on record

but with reference to the circumstances which mitigate the enormity of the

crime and that the nature of proof can have bearing upon the question of

sentence and not with the question of punishment.



36.      We may now consider some of the cases where death penalty was

imposed when conviction was based on circumstantial evidence.


 
(
i) Jumman Khan vs. State of U.P. and Another
 ; while dismissing

      Writ Petition of a death convict this Court noted in para 4 the earlier

      order passed by a bench of two judges confirming the death sentence.


            “4. Feeling aggrieved by the judgment of the High
            Court, the petitioner filed S.L.P. (Criminal) No. 558 of
            1986. This Court by its order dated March 20, 1986
            dismissed the SLP observing thus:



                 “Although the conviction of the petitioner
                 under Section 302 of the Indian Penal

   (1991) 1 SCC 752

                                                                             82

                       Code, 1860 rests on circumstantial
                       evidence, the circumstantial evidence
                       against the petitioner leads to no other
                       inference except that of his guilt and
                       excludes every hypothesis of his
                       innocence. Apart from the circumstances
                       brought out by the prosecution, each one of
                       which has been proved, there is no extra-
                       judicial confession which lends support to
                       the prosecution case that the child had been
                       raped by the petitioner and thereafter
                       strangulated to death.



                       Failure to impose a death sentence in such
                       grave cases where it is a crime against the
                       society — particularly in cases of murders
                       committed with extreme brutality — will
                       bring to naught the sentence of death
                       provided by 
Section 302
 of the Indian
                       Penal Code. It is the duty of the court to
                       impose a proper punishment depending
                       upon the degree of criminality and
                       desirability to impose such punishment.
                       The only punishment which the appellant
                       deserves for having committed the
                       reprehensible and gruesome murder of the
                       innocent child to satisfy his lust, is nothing
                       but death as a measure of social necessity
                       and also as a means of deterring other
                       potential offenders. The sentence of death
                       is confirmed.”


      (ii)   Amrutlal Someshwar Joshi vs. State of Maharashtra (I) :-



               “19. Learned counsel for the appellant further submitted
               that the case rests on the circumstantial evidence and the
               quality of the evidence adduced is not of that high order
               and therefore it is not safe to impose death sentence. 
In
               this context he relied on a judgment of this Court in
               
Shankar v. State of T.N. We
 have gone through that
               judgment and it is only indicated there that the quality of
               evidence also would be a factor to be taken into
               consideration. The circumstantial evidence in this case

   (1994) 6 SCC 186
   (1994) 4 SCC 478

                                                               83

cannot at all be said to be qualitatively inferior in any
manner. It is well-settled that if there is clinching and
reliable circumstantial evidence, then that would be the
best evidence to be safely relied upon.
 
As observed in

Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab8
, there may be many
circumstances justifying the passing of the lighter sentence
as there are countervailing circumstances of aggravation
warranting imposition of death sentence.
 
In 
Machhi Singh
v. State of Punjab9
, a Bench of three Judges of this Court
having noted the principles 
laid down in
 Bachan Singh
case8 regarding the formula of “rarest of rare cases” for
imposing death sentence, observed that the guidelines
indicated in Bachan Singh case8 will have to be culled out
and applied to the facts of each individual case where the
question of imposing of death sentence arises.
 
It was
further observed as under: (SCC p. 489, para 40)

     “If upon taking an overall global view of all
     the circumstances in the light of the aforesaid
     proposition and taking into account the
     answers to the questions posed hereinabove,
     the circumstances of the case are such that
     death sentence is warranted, the court would
     proceed to do so.”

Likewise in 
Allauddin Mian v. State of Bihar11
, the same
view has been reiterated thus: (SCC p. 22, para 12)

     “However, in order that the sentences may be
     properly graded to fit the degree of gravity of
     each case, it is necessary that the maximum
     sentence prescribed by law should, as
     observed in Bachan Singh case8, be reserved
     for the ‘rarest of rare’ cases which are of an
     exceptional nature. Sentences of severity are
     imposed to reflect the seriousness of the crime,
     to promote respect for the law, to provide just
     punishment for the offence, to afford adequate
     deterrent to criminal conduct and to protect the
     community from further similar conduct. It
     serves a three-fold purpose (i) punitive (ii)
     deterrent and (iii) protective. That is why this
     Court in Bachan Singh case8 observed that
     when the question of choice of sentence is
     under consideration the Court must not only
     look to the crime and the victim but also the
     circumstances of the criminal and the impact
     of the crime on the community. Unless the
     nature of the crime and the circumstances of

                                                                             84

                   the offender reveal that the criminal is a
                   menace to the society and the sentence of life
                   imprisonment would be altogether inadequate,
                   the court should ordinarily impose the lesser
                   punishment and not the extreme punishment of
                   death which should be reserved for exceptional
                   cases only.”

              Bearing these principles in mind and after having given
              our anxious consideration, we are of the firm opinion in
              view of the above circumstances that the case of the
              appellant comes within the category of “rarest of rare
              cases” and the two courts below have rightly awarded the
              death sentence.”

                                                     (Emphasis supplied)


      (iii)        Kamta Tiwari vs. State of M.P.


      (iv)         Molai and Another vs. State of M.P.


 
(v)          Shivaji alias 
Dadya Shankar Alhat vs. State of

      Maharashtra
; while affirming the conviction and sentence of death

      for offences under 
Sections 376
 and 
302
 IPC it was observed:-




              “27. The plea that in a case of circumstantial evidence
              death should not be awarded is without any logic. If the
              circumstantial evidence is found to be of unimpeachable
              character in establishing the guilt of the accused, that
              forms the foundation for conviction. That has nothing to
              do with the question of sentence as has been observed by
              this Court in various cases while awarding death sentence.
              The mitigating circumstances and the aggravating
              circumstances have to be balanced. In the balance sheet of
              such circumstances, the fact that the case rests on
              circumstantial evidence has no role to play. In fact in most
              of the cases where death sentences are awarded for rape
              and murder and the like, there is practically no scope for
              having an eyewitness. They are not committed in the
              public view. But the very nature of things in such cases,

   (1996) 6 SCC 250
   (1999) 9 SCC 581
   (2008) 15 SCC 269

                                                                      85

      the available evidence is circumstantial evidence. If the
      said evidence has been found to be credible, cogent and
      trustworthy for the purpose of recording conviction, to
      treat that evidence as a mitigating circumstance, would
      amount to consideration of an irrelevant aspect. The plea
      of the learned amicus curiae that the conviction is based
      on circumstantial evidence and, therefore, the death
      sentence should not be awarded is clearly unsustainable.”

                                              (emphasis supplied)


vi)       Vasanta Sampat Dupare v. State of Maharashtra6


      “38. On a critical analysis of the evidence on record, we
      are convinced that the circumstances that have been
      clearly established are: that the appellant was seen in the
      courtyard where the minor girl and other children were
      playing; that the appellant was seen taking the deceased on
      his bicycle; that he had gone to the grocery shop owned by
      PW 6 to buy Minto fresh chocolate along with her; that the
      accused had told PW 2 that the child was the daughter of
      his friend and he was going to “Tekdi-Wadi” along with
      the girl; that the appellant had led to the discovery of the
      dead body of the deceased, the place where he had washed
      his clothes and at his instance the stones smeared with
      blood were recovered; that the medical report clearly
      indicates about the injuries sustained by the deceased on
      her body; that the injuries sustained on the private parts
      have been stated by the doctor to have been caused by
      forcible sexual intercourse; that the stones that were seized
      were smeared with blood and the medical evidence
      corroborates the fact that injuries could have been caused
      by battering with stones; that the chemical analysis report
      shows that the blood group on the stones matches with the
      blood group found on the clothes of the appellant; that the
      appellant has not offered any explanation with regard to
      the recovery made at his instance; and that nothing has
      been stated in his examination under 
Section 313
 CrPC
      that there was any justifiable reason to implicate him in
      the crime in question. Thus, we find that each of the
      incriminating circumstances has been clearly established
      and the chain of circumstances are conclusive in nature to
      exclude any kind of hypothesis, but the one proposed to be
      proved, and lead to a definite conclusion that the crime
      was committed by the accused. Therefore, we have no
      hesitation in affirming the judgment of conviction
      rendered by the learned trial Judge and affirmed by the
      High Court.”

                                                                             86

                                                     (Emphasis supplied)
                                    


    vii)     Manoharan v. State


                “23. ….. The entire chain of events has been made out
                and despite this being a case of circumstantial evidence,
                the prosecution has clearly proved its case beyond
                reasonable doubt. The courts below are right in
                convicting the appellant of rape and murder.”
                                                     (Emphasis supplied)


             The decisions at Sl. Nos.(iv), (vi) and (vii) were by benches of

three Judges and dealt with cases where the convictions were inter alia

under 
Sections 302
, 
376
 IPC and the victims were aged 16 years or below;



while the others were by benches of two Judges.



37.          However, there is a definite line of cases, where thoughts have

been expressed that in cases of conviction based on circumstantial

evidence, the death sentence should not normally be imposed. Some such

cases are:-



 
(
i)         Aloke Nath Dutta v. State of West Bengal
:-




               “81. There is no eyewitness to the occurrence. Nobody has
               noticed any suspicious conduct on the part of the
               appellants indicating their role in committing murder or
               disposing of the dead body. While dealing with a case of
               grave nature like the present one, there is always a danger
               that conjectures and suspicion may take the place of legal
               truth. This Court has laid down guidelines from time to
               time in regard to a finding of guilt solely on the basis of
               circumstantial evidence in a number of cases. …. ….”


 
(
ii) Bishnu Prasad Sinha v. State of Assam14
:-




     (2019) 7 SCC 716
     (2007) 12 SCC 230

                                                                            87


             “55. The question which remains is as to what punishment
             should be awarded. Ordinarily, this Court, having regard to
             the nature of the offence, would not have differed with the
             opinion of the learned Sessions Judge as also the High
             Court in this behalf, but it must be borne in mind that the
             appellants are convicted only on the basis of the
             circumstantial evidence. There are authorities for the
             proposition that if the evidence is proved by circumstantial
             evidence, ordinarily, death penalty would not be awarded.

             Moreover, Appellant 1 showed his remorse and repentance
             even in his statement under 
Section 313
 of the Code of
             Criminal Procedure. He accepted his guilt.”

                                                (Emphasis supplied)


 
(
iii)       Swamy Shraddananda (2) v. State of Karnataka

                 While
 considering the decision of this Court in Bachan

     Singh8, it was observed:-




             “36. Arguing against standardisation of cases for the
             purpose of death sentence the Court observed that
             even within a single category offence there are
             infinite, unpredictable and unforeseeable variations.
             No two cases are exactly identical. There are
             countless permutations and combinations which are
             beyond the anticipatory capacity of the human
             calculus. The Court further observed that
             standardisation of the sentencing process tends to
             sacrifice justice at the altar of blind uniformity.

                                    … … …

             “48. That is not the end of the matter. Coupled with the
             deficiency of the criminal justice system is the lack of
             consistency in the sentencing process even by this Court.
             It is noted above that Bachan Singh8 laid down the
             principle of the rarest of rare cases. Machhi Singh9 for
             practical application crystallised the principle into five
             definite categories of cases of murder and in doing so also
             considerably enlarged the scope for imposing death
             penalty. But the unfortunate reality is that in later
             decisions neither the rarest of rare cases principle nor the
             Machhi Singh9 categories were followed uniformly and
             consistently.



   (2008) 13 SCC 767

                                                                                 88


            49. 
In 
Aloke Nath Dutta v. State of W.B.68 Sinha, J.
 gave
            some very good illustrations from a number of recent
            decisions in which on similar facts this Court took
            contrary views on giving death penalty to the convict. He
            finally observed that “courts in the matter of sentencing
            act differently although the fact situation may appear to be
            somewhat similar” and further “it is evident that different
            Benches had taken different view in the matter”.
 Katju, J.

            in his order passed in this appeal said that he did not agree
            with the decision in Aloke Nath Dutta68 in that it held that
            death sentence was not to be awarded in a case of
            circumstantial evidence. Katju, J. may be right that there
            cannot be an absolute rule excluding death sentence in all
            cases of circumstantial evidence (though in Aloke Nath
            Dutta68 it is said “normally” and not as an absolute rule).
            But there is no denying the illustrations cited by Sinha, J.

            which are a matter of fact.”
                                                     (emphasis supplied)

     (iv)         Santosh Kumar Satishbhushan Bariyar v. State of

     Maharashtra                                                           Relying


     upon the testimony of an approver, the sentence of death was

     awarded. The decision of this Court in Mohan and ors. vs. State

     of Tamil Nadu was distinguished thus:-



 
“161. Mr Adsure has placed strong reliance on a
            decision of this Court in 
Mohan v. State of T.N.71
 to
            contend that the manner in which the murder was
            committed itself points out that all the accused
            deserved death penalty. In our opinion the facts of that
            case are clearly distinguishable from the present one.
            That case involved the murder of a minor. It clearly is
            not applicable to the present case. Moreover, the
            Court 
in that case
 too recognised that proper and due
            regard must be given to the mitigating circumstances
            in every case.”
   (2009) 6 SCC 498
    (1998) 5 SCC 336 – case of kidnapping of a minor boy of 10 years for
ransom and murder. Award of death sentence to appellants Mohan and Gopi was
affirmed by this Court.


                                                              89


         After considering the mitigating circumstances it was

observed:-



    “167. The entire prosecution case hinges on the
    evidence of the approver. For the purpose of imposing
    death penalty, that factor may have to be kept in mind.
    We will assume that in Swamy Shraddananda (2)69,
    this Court did not lay down a firm law that in a case
    involving circumstantial evidence, imposition of
    death penalty would not be permissible. But, even in
    relation thereto the question which would arise would
    be whether in arriving at a conclusion some surmises,
    some hypothesis would be necessary in regard to the
    manner in which the offence was committed as
    contradistinguished from a case where the manner of
    occurrence had no role to play. Even where sentence
    of death is to be imposed on the basis of the
    circumstantial evidence, the circumstantial evidence
    must be such which leads to an exceptional case.



    168. We must, however, add that in a case of this
    nature where the entire prosecution case revolves
    round the statement of an approver or is dependent
    upon the circumstantial evidence, the prudence
    doctrine should be invoked. For the aforementioned
    purpose, at the stage of sentencing evaluation of
    evidence would not be permissible, the courts not
    only have to solely depend upon the findings arrived
    at for the purpose of recording a judgment of
    conviction, but also consider the matter keeping in
    view the evidences which have been brought on
    record on behalf of the parties and in particular the
    accused for imposition of a lesser punishment. A
    statement of approver in regard to the manner in
    which crime has been committed vis-à-vis the role
    played by the accused, on the one hand, and that of
    the approver, on the other, must be tested on the
    touchstone of the prudence doctrine.”

                                      (emphasis supplied)

                                                                         90


 
(
v)        Purna Chandra Kusal v. State of Orissa16


              “7. We are, however, of the opinion that the death
              sentence in the present case was not called for. The
              appellant was a labourer living in a basti alongside the
              railway line and was, at the time of the incident, about
              30 years of age. We also see that the entire evidence is
              circumstantial in nature. Concededly, there is no
              inflexible rule that a death sentence cannot be
              awarded in a case resting on circumstantial evidence
              but courts are as a matter of prudence, hesitant in
              awarding this sentence, in such a situation. It is true
              that the crime was indeed a heinous one as the victim
              was only five years of age and the daughter of PW 5
              who was a neighbour of the appellant. On a
              cumulative assessment of the facts, we are of the
              opinion that the death sentence should be commuted
              into one for life.”

                                               (Emphasis supplied)


     (vi)         Neel Kumar v. The State of Haryana


 
(
vii)        Sushil Sharma vs. State (NCT of Delhi
)


 
(
viii)       Mahesh Dhanaji Shinde vs. State of Maharashtra


     (ix)         Kalu Khan v. State of Rajasthan17

              “24. 
In respect of award of death sentence in cases
              where sole basis for conviction is circumstantial
              evidence, this Court in 
Swamy Shraddananda v. State
              of Karnataka
, has acknowledged that such cases have
              far greater chances of turning out to be wrongful
              convictions, later on, in comparison to ones which are
              based on fitter sources of proof. This Court cautioned
              that convictions based on “seemingly conclusive
              circumstantial evidence” should not be presumed as
   (2012) 5 SCC 766
   (2014) 4 SCC 317
   (2014) 4 SCC 292
   (2007) 12 SCC 288 para 87

                                                                      91

            foolproof incidences and the fact that the same are
            based on circumstantial evidence must be a definite
            factor at the sentencing stage deliberations,
            considering that capital punishment is unique in its
            total irrevocability. Further, this Court observed that
            any characteristic of trial, such as conviction solely
            resting on circumstantial evidence, which contributes
            to the uncertainty in the “culpability calculus”, must
            attract negative attention while deciding maximum
            penalty for murder.




            25. This Court noticed certain decisions under the
            American death penalty jurisprudence as follows:

 
(
Swamy Shraddananda
 case 75, SCC pp. 320-21, paras
            88-90)

                 “88.
 One of the older cases in this league
                 dates back to 1874, Merritt v. State, where
                 the Supreme Court of Georgia described
                 the applicable law in Georgia as follows:



                       ‘By the Penal Code of this State
                       the punishment of murder shall
                       be death, except when the
                       conviction is founded solely on
                       circumstantial testimony. When
                       the conviction is had solely on
                       circumstantial testimony, then it
                       is discretionary with the
                       Presiding Judge to impose the
                       death penalty or to sentence the
                       defendant to imprisonment in
                       the penitentiary for life, unless
                       the jury … shall recommend
                       that     the     defendant     be
                       imprisoned in the penitentiary
                       for life; in that case the
                       Presiding     Judge    has    no
                       discretion, but is bound to
                       commute the punishment from
                       death to imprisonment for life in
                       the penitentiary.’


   (1874) 52 Gs 82

                                                                       92


                 89. Later case of Jackson v. State, Ala at
                 pp. 29-30 followed the aforementioned
                 case. [Also see S.M. Phillipps, Famous
                 Cases of Circumstantial Evidence with an
                 Introduction on the Theory of Presumptive
                 Proof, 50-52 (1875).]


                 90. In United States v. Quinones, F Supp
                 2d at p. 267 the Court remarked:



                       ‘Many States that allow the
                       death    penalty    permit    a
                       conviction based solely on
                       circumstantial evidence only if
                       such evidence excludes to a
                       moral certainty every other
                       reasonable inference except
                       guilt.’”


            26. 
In 
Santosh Kumar Satishbhushan Bariyar v. State
            of Maharashtra70
, all the accused persons including
            the appellant were unemployed young men in search
            of employment. In execution of a plan proposed by
            the appellant and accepted by them, they kidnapped
            their friend with the motive of procuring ransom from
            his family but later murdered him and after cutting his
            body into pieces disposed of the same at different
            places. One of the accused persons turned approver
            and the prosecution case was based entirely on his
            evidence. The trial court awarded death sentence to
            the appellant. The High Court confirmed the death
            sentence. In appeal, this Court observed that
            punishment cannot be determined on grounds of
            proportionality alone. This Court observed that
            though there was nothing to show that the appellant
            could not be reformed and rehabilitated and the
            manner and method of disposal of the dead body of
            the deceased reflected most foul and despicable case
            of murder, mere mode of disposal of the dead body
            may not by itself be made the ground for inclusion of
            a case in the rarest of rare category for the purpose of
            imposition of death sentence. Other factors require to

   74 Ala 26 (1883)
   205 F Supp. 2d 256 (SDNY 2002)

                                                           93

be considered along with the aforesaid. This Court
was of the view that the fact that the prosecution case
rested on the evidence of the approver, will have to be
kept in mind. Further, that where the death sentence is
to be imposed on the basis of circumstantial evidence,
the circumstantial evidence must be such which leads
to an exceptional case. It was further observed that the
discretion given to the court in such cases assumes
onerous importance and its exercise becomes
extremely difficult because of the irrevocable
character of death penalty. Where two views
ordinarily could be taken, imposition of death
sentence would not be appropriate. In the
circumstances, the death sentence was converted to
life imprisonment.


                        … … …


30. 
In 
Mahesh Dhanaji Shinde v. State of
Maharashtra74
, the conviction of the appellant-
accused was upheld keeping in view that the
circumstantial evidence pointed only in the direction
of their guilt given that the modus operandi of the
crime, homicidal death, identity of 9 of 10 victims,
last seen theory and other incriminating circumstances
were proved. However, the Court has thought it fit to
commute the sentence of death to imprisonment for
life considering the age, socio-economic conditions,
custodial behaviour of the appellant-accused persons
and that the case was entirely based on circumstantial
evidence……


31. In the instant case, admittedly the entire web of
evidence is circumstantial. The appellant-accused’s
culpability rests on various independent evidence,
such as, him being “last seen” with the deceased
before she went missing; the extra-judicial confession
of his co-accused before PW 1 and the village
members; corroborative testimonies of the said village
members to the extra-judicial confession and recovery
of the deceased’s body; coupled with the medical
evidence which when joined together paint him in the
blood of the deceased. While the said evidence proves
the guilt of the appellant-accused and makes this a fit
case for conviction, it does not sufficiently convince
the judicial mind to entirely foreclose the option of a

                                                          94

sentence lesser than the death penalty. Even though
there are no missing links in the chain, the evidence
also does not sufficiently provide any direct indicia
whereby irrefutable conclusions can be drawn with
regard to the nexus between “the crime” and “the
criminal”.     Undoubtedly,         the    aggravating
circumstances reflected through the nature of the
crime and young age of the victim make the crime
socially abhorrent and demand harsh punishment.
However, there exist the circumstances such as there
being no criminal antecedents of the appellant-
accused and the entire case having been rested on
circumstantial evidence including the extra-judicial
confession of a co-accused. These factors impregnate
the balance of circumstances and introduce
uncertainty in the “culpability calculus” and thus,
persuade us that death penalty is not an inescapable
conclusion in the instant case. We are inclined to
conclude that in the present scenario an alternate to
the death penalty, that is, imprisonment for life would
be appropriate punishment in the present
circumstances.



32. In our considered view, in the impugned judgment
and order, the High Court has rightly noticed that life
and death are acts of the divine and the divine’s
authority has been delegated to the human courts of
law to be only exercised in exceptional circumstances
with utmost caution. Further, that the first and
foremost effort of the Court should be to continue the
life till its natural end and the delegated divine
authority should be exercised only after arriving at a
conclusion that no other punishment but for death will
serve the ends of justice. We have critically
appreciated the entire evidence in its minutest detail
and are of the considered opinion that the present case
does not warrant award of the extreme sentence of
death to the appellant-accused and the sentence of life
imprisonment would be adequate and meet the ends
of justice. We are of the opinion that the four main
objectives which the State intends to achieve, namely,
deterrence, prevention, retribution and reformation
can be achieved by sentencing the appellant-accused
for life.”

                                                                              95

                                                   (emphasis supplied)





 
(
x) Nand Kishore v. State of Madhya Pradesh


            “15.
 
The learned counsel appearing for the State has
            placed reliance on the judgment of this Court in 
Mukesh v.
            State (NCT of Delhi
)33 [known as Nirbhaya case] in
            support of her case and submitted that applying the ratio
            laid down in the aforesaid judgment, the case falls in the
            “rarest of rare” cases attracting death penalty. With
            reference to abovesaid arguments of the learned counsel
            for the State, it is to be noticed that the case of Mukesh33 is
            distinguishable on the facts from the case on hand. It is to
            be noticed that Mukesh33 is a case of gang rape and murder
            of the victim and an attempt to murder of the male victim.
            It was the specific case of the prosecution that the crimes
            were carried out pursuant to a conspiracy and the accused
            were convicted under 
Section 120-B
 IPC apart from other
            offences. Further, as a fact, it was found in the aforesaid
            case that the accused Mukesh had been involved in other
            criminal activity on the same night. Further, it is also to be
            noticed that in the aforesaid case, there was a dying
            declaration, eyewitness to the incident, etc. So far as the
            present case is concerned, it solely rests on circumstantial
            evidence. It is the specific case of the appellant that he was
            denied the proper legal assistance in the matter and he is a
            manhole worker. The appellant was aged about 50 years.
            Further, in this case there is no finding recorded by the
            courts below to the effect that there is no possibility of
            reformation of the appellant. We are of the view that the
            reasons assigned by the trial court as confirmed by the
            High Court, do not constitute special reasons within the
            meaning of 
Section 354(3)
 CrPC to impose death penalty
            on the accused.”
                                                     (emphasis supplied)


     (xi)        Md. Mannan v. State of Bihar

            “57. In this case, the conviction of the petitioner is based
            on circumstantial evidence and the alleged extra-judicial
            confession made by the petitioner to the police in course
            of investigation, on the basis of which certain recoveries

   (2019) 16 SCC 278
   (2019) 16 SCC 584

                                                                               96

              were made. There is no forensic evidence against the
              petitioner. It would, in our view, be unsafe to uphold the
              imposition of death sentence on the petitioner.


                                  …     …    …


              79. In this case, an eight-year-old innocent girl fell prey to
              the carnal desire and lust of the petitioner. It is not known
              whether there was any premeditation on the part of the
              petitioner to murder the victim. The circumstances in
              which he murdered the victim are also not known. The
              conviction is based on circumstantial evidence and extra-
              judicial confession made by the petitioner to the police in
              course of investigation. There can be no doubt that the
              crime is abhorrent, but it is doubtful as to whether the
              crime committed by the petitioner can be termed as “rarest
              of the rare”.

                                                       (emphasis supplied)


      (xii)        Dileep Bankar v. State of M.P.


              “We are not inclined to interfere with the conviction part.
              However, with respect to sentence, in the facts and
              circumstances of the case, we are inclined to set aside the
              capital sentence. It was stated by learned Counsel for the
              Appellant that the Appellant has become the victim of his
              own past and there is only circumstantial evidence against
              him. We deem it proper to impose the sentence of total 25
              years of imprisonment. However, death sentence is set
              aside.”
                                                     (emphasis supplied)

         Out of these 12 cases, cases at Sl. Nos. (iii), (vii), (viii), (ix), (x),


(xi) and (xii) were decided by benches of three Judges of this Court, while

the others were decided by benches of two Judges.



38.      An important case for study is the decision of this Court in


Rameshbhai Chandubhai Rathod vs. State of Gujarat
 , in which the


   MANU/SC/1125/2019
   (2009) 5 SCC 740

                                                                         97

accused was found guilty of offences punishable under 
Sections 363
, 
366
,


376
, 
397
 and 
302
 IPC. The victim was a student of 4th standard. The

accused was awarded death sentence.               The case was based on the

circumstantial evidence and Pasayat, J. observed:-


          “30. The plea that in a case of circumstantial evidence
          death should not be awarded is without any logic. If the
          circumstantial evidence is found to be of unimpeachable
          character in establishing the guilt of the accused, that
          forms the foundation for conviction. That has nothing to
          do with the question of sentence as has been observed by
          this Court in various cases while awarding death sentence.
          The mitigating circumstances and the aggravating
          circumstances have to be balanced. In the balance sheet of
          such circumstances, the fact that the case rests on
          circumstantial evidence has no role to play. In fact in most
          of the cases where death sentence is awarded for rape and
          murder and the like, there is practically no scope for
          having an eyewitness. They are not committed in the
          public view. By the very nature of things in such cases, the
          available evidence is circumstantial evidence. If the said
          evidence has been found to be credible, cogent and
          trustworthy for the purpose of recording conviction, to
          treat that evidence as a mitigating circumstance, would
          amount to consideration of an irrelevant aspect. The plea
          of learned counsel for the appellant that the conviction is
          based on circumstantial evidence and, therefore, the death
          sentence should not be awarded is clearly unsustainable.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)



       Having found the appellant guilty of the concerned offences,

Pasayat, J. affirmed the award of death sentence.



 
Ganguly, J. agreed with Pasayat, J. on the issue of conviction but

on the question of sentence he was of the view that the proper sentence

was imprisonment for life. Ganguly, J. found that the reliance by the High

                                                                       98


Court on the decision in 
Dhananjoy Chatterjee vs. State of W.B.
 , was

incorrect. It was stated:-




            “64. There are vital differences in the facts of the two
            cases. In the present case, there is no allegation that
            the appellant ever misbehaved with the deceased. In
            Dhananjoy83, prior to the date of crime, there were
            many occasions when the victim had been teased by
            Dhananjoy on her way to and back from her school.
            The latest being on 2-3-1990, three days prior to her
            death, when Dhananjoy had asked the deceased to
            accompany him to watch a movie. To that the
            deceased protested and had told her mother about it.
            Then her father had consulted some neighbours and
            thereafter, filed a written complaint to the security
            agency which had hired Dhananjoy and deployed in
            their apartment. The agency had arranged for
            Dhananjoy to be transferred to another apartment.
            Thus there was a motive and a sense of revenge in the
            mind of Dhananjoy in committing the crime against
            the deceased.



          After considering various cases, Ganguly, J. observed:-



            “117. Keeping these principles in mind, I find that in
            the instant case the appellant is a young man and his
            age was 28 years old as per the version in the charge-
            sheet. He is married and has two daughters. He has no
            criminal antecedents, at least none has been brought
            on record. His behaviour in general was not
            objectionable and certainly not with the deceased girl
            prior to the incident. The unfortunate incident is
            possibly the first crime committed by the appellant.
            He is not otherwise a criminal. Such a person is not a
            threat to the society. His entire life is ahead of him.



                                …      …    …


 
120. I agree with His Lordship that the appellant has
            to be convicted on other charges. However, his
            conviction does not automatically lead to his death
            sentence. In my humble opinion instead of death
   (1994) 2 SCC 220

                                                                         99

            sentence a sentence of rigorous imprisonment for life
            will serve the ends of justice. With the aforesaid
            modification of the sentence the appeal is dismissed
            to the extent indicated above.”


          The matter was, therefore, referred to a bench of three 
Judges

    [Rameshbhai Chandubhai Rathod (2) vs. State of Gujarat
 23] which did

    not, in terms, disagree with the view taken by Pasayat, J. nor was there

    any observation to the contrary on the issue of appreciation of a case

    based on circumstantial evidence in capital punishment matters. But the

    bench adopted the view taken by Ganguly, J. and stated as under:-




            “9. Both the Hon’ble Judges have relied extensively
            on Dhananjoy Chatterjee case83. In this case the death
            sentence had been awarded by the trial court on
            similar facts and confirmed by the Calcutta High
            Court and the appeal too dismissed by this Court
            leading to the execution of the accused. Ganguly, J.
            has, however, drawn a distinction on the facts of that
            case and the present one and held that as the appellant
            was a young man, only 27 years of age, it was
            obligatory on the trial court to have given a finding as
            to a possible rehabilitation and reformation and the
            possibility that he could still become a useful member
            of society in case he was given a chance to do so.



 
10. We are, therefore, of the opinion that in the light
            of the findings recorded by Ganguly, J. it would not
            be proper to maintain the death sentence on the
            appellant. At the same time the gravity of the offence,
            the behaviour of the appellant and the fear and
            concern such incidents generate in ordered society,
            cannot be ignored. We, therefore, feel that a via media
            ought to be adopted in the light of the judgments of
            this Court in 
Ramraj v. State of Chhattisgarh
 and
            
Mulla v. State of U.P. In
 these two cases, this Court
    (2010) 1 SCC 573
    (2010) 3 SCC 508

                                                                      100

          has held that the term “imprisonment for life” which
          is found in 
Section 302
 IPC, would mean
          imprisonment for the natural life of the convict
          subject to the powers of the President and the
          Governor under 
Articles 72
 and 
161
 of the
          Constitution of India or of the State Government
          under 
Section 433-A
 of the Code of Criminal
          Procedure.”


39.    It is also required be noted here that there was disagreement

between two Judges who heard 
Swamy Sharaddananda vs. State of

Karnataka75
. Sinha, J. was of the view that the accused be given life

sentence while Katju, J. affirmed the award of death sentence. The matter

was therefore referred to a bench of three Judges whose decision is

reported as Swamy Shraddananda (2)69 which found the observations of

Katju, J. that “there cannot be an absolute rule excluding death sentence in

all cases of circumstantial evidence” to be correct. The bench however

formulated a special category of sentence in paragraphs 91 to 93 of its

decision.


      However, the subsequent decision in Kalu Khan17 quoted with

approval paragraphs 88 to 90 from the opinion of Sinha, J when the matter

was heard by two Judges of this Court in Swamy Shraddananda75.


40.    These cases discussed in preceding paragraphs show that though it

is accepted that the observations in Swamy Shraddananda (2)69 did not lay

down any firm principle that in a case involving circumstantial evidence,

imposition of death penalty would not be permissible, a definite line of

                                                                        101

thought that where the sentence of death is to be imposed on the basis of

circumstantial evidence, the circumstantial evidence must be such which

leads to an exceptional case was accepted by a bench of three Judges of

this Court in Kalu Khan17. As a matter of fact, it accepted the caution

expressed by Sinha J. in 
Swamy Shraddananda vs. State of Karnataka75


and the conclusions in Santosh Kumar Satishbhushan Bariyar70 to restate

the principles with clarity in its decision.


41.     It can therefore be summed up :-



      a) it is not as if imposition of death penalty is impermissible to be

         awarded in circumstantial evidence cases; and

      b) if the circumstantial evidence is of an unimpeachable character in

         establishing the guilt of the accused and leads to an exceptional

         case or the evidence sufficiently convinces the judicial mind that

         the option of a sentence lesser than death penalty is foreclosed, the

         death penalty can be imposed.



42.     It must therefore be held that merely because the instant case is

based on circumstantial evidence there is no reason to commute the death

sentence. However, the matter must be considered in the light of the

aforestated principles and see whether the circumstantial evidence is of

unimpeachable character and the option of a lesser sentence is foreclosed.

                                                                       102


43.       Before we deal with the matter from the perspective as stated

above, we must consider the submission advanced by Ms. Mathur, learned

Senior Advocate with regard to “residual doubt” as said submission also

touches upon the character of evidence.





44.       The theory of “residual doubt” was noted for the first time by a

bench of two judges of this Court in 
Ashok Debbarma Alias Achak

Debbarma vs. State of Tripura18
. The discussion in paragraphs 30 to 34

under the caption “residual doubt” was as under:-


 
“30. An accused has a profound right not to be convicted
            of an offence which is not established by the evidential
            standard of proof “beyond reasonable doubt”. This Court
            in 
Krishnan v. State
, held that the


                  “doubts would be called reasonable if they are
                  free from a zest for abstract speculation. Law
                  cannot afford any favourite other than truth. To
                  constitute reasonable doubt, it must be free
                  from an overemotional response. Doubts must
                  be actual and substantial doubts as to the guilt
                  of the accused persons arising from the
                  evidence, or from the lack of it, as opposed to
                  mere vague apprehensions. A reasonable doubt
                  is not an imaginary, trivial or a merely possible
                  doubt, but a fair doubt based upon reason and
                  common sense. It must grow out of the
                  evidence in the case”.




 
In 
Ramakant Rai v. Madan Rai
, the above principle has
            been reiterated.




     (2003) 7 SCC 56 : 2003 SCC (Cri) 1577
     (2003) 12 SCC 395 : 2004 SCC (Cri) Supp 445

                                                                             103


           31. In Commonwealth v. Webster at p. 320, Massachusetts
           Court, as early as in 1850, has explained the expression
           “reasonable doubt” as follows:



                 “Reasonable doubt … is not a mere possible
                 doubt; because everything relating to human
                 affairs, and depending on moral evidence, is
                 open to some possible or imaginary doubt. It is
                 that state of the case which, after the entire
                 comparison and consideration of all the
                 evidence, leaves the minds of the jurors in that
                 condition that they cannot say they feel an
                 abiding conviction.”

           In our criminal justice system, for recording guilt of the
           accused, it is not necessary that the prosecution should
           prove the case with absolute or mathematical certainty, but
           only beyond reasonable doubt. Criminal courts, while
           examining whether any doubt is beyond reasonable doubt,
           may carry in their mind, some “residual doubt”, even
           though the courts are convinced of the accused persons’
           guilt beyond reasonable doubt. For instance, in the instant
           case, it was pointed out that, according to the prosecution,
           30-35 persons armed with weapons such as firearms, dao,
           lathi, etc., set fire to the houses of the villagers and opened
           fire which resulted in the death of 15 persons, but only
           eleven persons were charge-sheeted and, out of which,
           charges were framed only against five accused persons.
           Even out of those five persons, three were acquitted,
           leaving the appellant and another, who is absconding. The
           court, in such circumstances, could have entertained a
           “residual doubt” as to whether the appellant alone had
           committed the entire crime, which is a mitigating
           circumstance to be taken note of by the court, at least
           when the court is considering the question whether the
           case falls under the rarest of the rare category.



           32. “Residual doubt” is a mitigating circumstance,
           sometimes used and urged before the jury in the United
           States and, generally, not found favour by the various
           courts in the United States. In Franklin v. Lynaugh, while
           dealing with the death sentence, the Court held as follows:



                 “The petitioner also contends that the sentencing
                 procedures followed in his case prevented the
                 jury from considering, in mitigation of sentence,
    (1850) 5 Cush 295 : 52 Am Dec 711 (Mass Sup Ct)
   101 L Ed 2d 155 : 487 US 164 (1988)

                                                                          104

                 any ‘residual doubts’ it might have had about his
                 guilt. The petitioner uses the phrase ‘residual
                 doubts’ to refer to doubts that may have lingered
                 in the minds of jurors who were convinced of
                 his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, but who
                 were not absolutely certain of his guilt. Brief for
                 Petitioner 14. The plurality and dissent reject
                 the petitioner’s ‘residual doubt’ claim because
                 they conclude that the special verdict questions
                 did not prevent the jury from giving mitigating
                 effect to its ‘residual doubts’ about the
                 petitioner’s guilt. See ante at Franklin, US p.
                 175; post at Franklin, US p. 189. This
                 conclusion is open to question, however.
                 Although the jury was permitted to consider
                 evidence presented at the guilt phase in the
                 course of answering the special verdict
                 questions, the jury was specifically instructed to
                 decide whether the evidence supported
                 affirmative answers to the special questions
                 ‘beyond a reasonable doubt’. App. 15
                 (emphasis added). Because of this instruction,
                 the jury might not have thought that, in
                 sentencing the petitioner, it was free to demand
                 proof of his guilt beyond all doubt.”


            33. In California v. Brown and other cases, the US courts
            took the view, “residual doubt” is not a fact about the
            defendant or the circumstances of the crime, but a
            lingering uncertainty about facts, a state of mind that
            exists somewhere between “beyond a reasonable doubt”
            and “absolute certainty”. The petitioner’s “residual doubt”
            claim is that the States must permit capital sentencing
            bodies to demand proof of guilt to “an absolute certainty”
            before imposing the death sentence. Nothing in our cases
            mandates the imposition of this heightened burden of
            proof at capital sentencing.



            34. We also, in this country, as already indicated, expect
            the prosecution to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt,
            but not with “absolute certainty”. But, in between
            “reasonable doubt” and “absolute certainty”, a decision-

            maker’s mind may wander, possibly in a given case he
            may go for “absolute certainty” so as to award death
            sentence, short of that he may go for “beyond reasonable
            doubt”. Suffice it to say, so far as the present case is
            concerned, we entertained a lingering doubt as to whether

   93 L Ed 2d 934 : 479 US 538 (1987)

                                                                          105

           the appellant alone could have executed the crime single-
           handedly, especially when the prosecution itself says that
           it was the handiwork of a large group of people. If that be
           so, in our view, the crime perpetrated by a group of people
           in an extremely brutal, grotesque and dastardly manner,
           could not have been thrown upon the appellant alone
           without charge-sheeting other group of persons numbering
           around 35. All the element test as well as the residual
           doubt test, in a given case, may favour the accused, as a
           mitigating factor.”

                                                  (Emphasis supplied)



45.      The decision of this Court in Ashok Debbarma18 was relied upon

in following decisions by benches of three judges of this Court:-




(A)      In Sudam alias 
Rahul Kniram Jadhav v. State of Maharashtra19


the appellant was convicted of having caused the death of five persons;




i.e. the lady who was living with him as his wife, two children from her

previous marriage and two children from the appellant. The death

sentence awarded to him was confirmed by this Court. However, in

review petition, the sentence was commuted to “imprisonment for the

remainder of his life sans any right to remission”. The discussion was as

under:



 
“19.1. At this juncture, it must be noted that though it may
           be a relevant consideration in sentencing that the evidence
           in a given case is circumstantial in nature, there is no bar
           on the award of the death sentence in cases based upon
           such evidence (see 
Swamy Shraddananda v. State of
           Karnataka75
 and 
Ramesh v. State of Rajasthan
).




   (2011) 3 SCC 685

                                                                106

19.2. In such a situation, it is up to the Court to determine
whether the accused may be sentenced to death upon the
strength of circumstantial evidence, given the peculiar
facts and circumstances of each case, while assessing all
the relevant aggravating circumstances of the crime, such
as its brutality, enormity and premeditated nature, and
mitigating circumstances of the accused, such as his socio-

economic background, age, extreme emotional disturbance
at the time of commission of the offence, and so on.

19.3. 
In this regard, it would also be pertinent to refer to
the discussion in 
Ashok Debbarma v. State of Tripura86
,
where this Court elaborated upon the concept of “residual
doubt” which simply means that in spite of being
convinced of the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable
doubt, the Court may harbour lingering or residual doubts
in its mind regarding such guilt. This Court noted that the
existence of residual doubt was a ground sometimes urged
before American courts as a mitigating circumstance with
respect to imposing the death sentence, and noted as
follows:




   “33. In California v. Brown90 and other cases, the
   US courts took the view, “residual doubt” is not a
   fact about the defendant or the circumstances of the
   crime, but a lingering uncertainty about facts, a
   state of mind that exists somewhere between
   “beyond a reasonable doubt” and “absolute
   certainty”. The petitioner’s “residual doubt” claim is
   that the States must permit capital sentencing bodies
   to demand proof of guilt to “an absolute certainty”
   before imposing the death sentence. Nothing in our
   cases mandates the imposition of this heightened
   burden of proof at capital sentencing.



   34. We also, in this country, as already indicated,
   expect the prosecution to prove its case beyond
   reasonable doubt, but not with “absolute certainty”.

   But, in between “reasonable doubt” and “absolute
   certainty”, a decision-maker’s mind may wander,
   possibly in a given case he may go for “absolute
   certainty” so as to award death sentence, short of
   that he may go for “beyond reasonable doubt”.
   Suffice it to say, so far as the present case is
   concerned, we entertained a lingering doubt as to
   whether the appellant alone could have executed the
   crime single-handedly, especially when the
   prosecution itself says that it was the handiwork of a
   large group of people. If that be so, in our view, the

                                                               107

   crime perpetrated by a group of people in an
   extremely brutal, grotesque and dastardly manner,
   could not have been thrown upon the appellant alone
   without charge-sheeting other group of persons
   numbering around 35. All the element test as well as
   the residual doubt test, in a given case, may favour
   the accused, as a mitigating factor.”

19.4. While the concept of “residual doubt” has
undoubtedly not been given much attention in Indian
capital sentencing jurisprudence, the fact remains that this
Court has on several occasions held the quality of
evidence to a higher standard for passing the irrevocable
sentence of death than that which governs conviction, that
is to say, it has found it unsafe to award the death penalty
for convictions based on the nature of the circumstantial
evidence on record. 
In fact, this question was given some
attention in a recent decision by this Bench, in 
Mohd.
Mannan v. State of Bihar80
, where we found it unsafe to
affirm the death penalty awarded to the accused in light of
the nature of the evidence on record, though the conviction
had been affirmed on the basis of circumstantial evidence.


                         …    …    …

“21. Evidently, even the fact that the evidence was
circumstantial in nature did not weigh very heavily on the
Court’s mind, let alone the strength and nature of the
circumstantial evidence. Be that as it may, we find that the
material on record is sufficient to convince the Court of
the petitioner’s guilt beyond reasonable doubt; however,
the nature of the circumstantial evidence in this case
amounts to a mitigating circumstance significant enough
to tilt the balance of aggravating and mitigating
circumstances in the petitioner’s favour, keeping in mind
the doctrine of prudence. Moreover, it is also possible that
the incorrect observations pertaining to Anita’s facial
injuries further led the Court to conclude in favour of
imposing the death sentence on the petitioner. Thus, we
are of the considered opinion that there was a reasonable
probability that this Court would have set aside the
sentence of death in appeal, since the only surviving
evidence against the petitioner herein pertains to his
motive to commit the crime, the circumstance of “last
seen” and a solitary extra-judicial confession. In other
words, it cannot be said that the punishment of life
imprisonment is unquestionably foreclosed in the instant
case, in spite of the gravity and barbarity of the offence.

                                                                            108


            22. We are thus compelled to conclude that the award of
            the death penalty in the instant case, based on the evidence
            on record, cannot be upheld.



            23. At the same time, we conclude that a sentence of life
            imprisonment simpliciter would be inadequate in the
            instant case, given the gruesome nature of the offence, and
            the menace posed to society at large by the petitioner, as
            evinced by the conduct of the petitioner in jail. As per the
            report submitted in pursuance of the order of this Court
            dated 31-10-2018, it has been brought on record that the
            conduct of the petitioner in jail has been unsatisfactory,
            and that he gets aggressive and indulges in illegal
            activities in prison, intentionally abusing prisoners and
            prison staff and provoking fights with other prisoners. Two
            FIRs have also been registered against the petitioner for
            abusing and threatening the Superintendent of the Nagpur
            Central Prison.



 
23.1. As this Court has already held in a catena of
            decisions, by way of a via media between life
            imprisonment simpliciter and the death sentence, it may be
            appropriate to impose a restriction on the petitioner’s right
            to remission of the sentence of life imprisonment, which
            usually works out to 14 years in prison upon remission.
            We may fruitfully refer to the decisions in 
Swamy
            Shraddananda (2) v. State of Karnataka69
 and 
Union of
            India v. V. Sriharan
, in this regard.
 
We therefore direct
            that the petitioner shall remain in prison for the remainder
            of his life.”
                                                    (Emphasis supplied)


(B)      In Ravishankar alias 
Baba Vishwakarma v. State of Madhya

Pradesh20
, the appellant was convicted under 
Sections 376
, 
302
 and 
376A


of IPC and also under the provisions of 
POCSO Act
 for having raped and

caused the murder by throttling of a 13 years old girl. The death sentence

awarded by the trial court was confirmed by the High Court but in appeal

the death sentence was substituted by this Court with imprisonment for


   (2016) 7 SCC 1 : (2016) 2 SCC Cri 695

                                                                         109

life with a direction that “no remission to be granted and that the appellant

shall remain in prison for rest of his life”. The relevant passages from the

decision are:-




 
“57. Such imposition of a higher standard of proof for
            purposes of death sentencing over and above “beyond
            reasonable doubt” necessary for criminal conviction is
            similar to the “residual doubt” metric adopted by this
            Court in 
Ashok Debbarma v. State of Tripura18
 wherein it
            was noted that: (SCC p. 763, para 31)

                   “31. … In our criminal justice system, for
                   recording guilt of the accused, it is not necessary
                   that the prosecution should prove the case with
                   absolute or mathematical certainty, but only
                   beyond reasonable doubt. Criminal courts, while
                   examining whether any doubt is beyond
                   reasonable doubt, may carry in their mind, some
                   “residual doubt”, even though the courts are
                   convinced of the accused persons’ guilt beyond
                   reasonable doubt.”


 
58. Ashok Debbarma18 drew a distinction between a
            “residual doubt”, which is any remaining or lingering
            doubt about the defendant’s guilt which might remain at
            the sentencing stage despite satisfaction of the “beyond a
            reasonable doubt” standard during conviction, and
            reasonable doubts which as defined in 
Krishnan v. State86

            are “actual and substantive, and not merely imaginary,
            trivial or merely possible”. These “residual doubts”
            although not relevant for conviction, would tilt towards
            mitigating circumstance to be taken note of whilst
            considering whether the case falls under the “rarest of
            rare” category.




            59. This theory is also recognised in other jurisdictions
            like the United States, where some State courts like the
            Supreme Court of Tennessee in State v. McKinney have
            explained that residual doubt of guilt is a valid non-

            statutory mitigating circumstance during the sentencing
            stage and have allowed for new evidence during
            sentencing proceedings related to defendant’s character,
            background history, physical condition, etc.


   74 SW 3d 291

                                                               110


60. The above-cited principles have been minutely
observed by us, taking into consideration the peculiar facts
and circumstances of the case in hand. At the outset, we
would highlight that the High Court while confirming
death has observed that the girl was found bleeding due to
forcible sexual intercourse, which fact, however, is not
supported by medical evidence. However, such erroneous
finding has no impact on conviction under 
Section 376-A

IPC for a bare perusal of the section shows that only the
factum of death of the victim during the offence of rape is
required, and such death need not be with any guilty
intention or be a natural consequence of the act of rape
only. It is worded broadly enough to include death by any
act committed by the accused if done contemporaneously
with the crime of rape. Any other interpretation would
defeat the object of ensuring safety of women and would
perpetuate the earlier loophole of the rapists claiming lack
of intention to cause death to seek a reduced charge under

Section 304
 IPC as noted in the Report of the Committee
on Amendments to Criminal Law, headed by Justice J.S.
Verma, former Chief Justice of India:



     “22. While we believe that enhanced penalties
     in a substantial number of sexual assault cases
     can be adjudged on the basis of the law 
laid
     down in
 the aforesaid cases, certain situations
     warrant a specific treatment. We believe that
     where the offence of sexual assault, particularly
     “gang rapes”, is accompanied by such brutality
     and violence that it leads to death or a persistent
     vegetative state (or “PVS” in medical
     terminology), punishment must be severe —
     with the minimum punishment being life
     imprisonment. While we appreciate the
     argument that where such offences result in
     death, the case may also be tried under 
Section
     302
 IPC as a “rarest of the rare” case, we must
     acknowledge that many such cases may actually
     fall within the ambit of Section 304 (Part II)
     since the “intention to kill” may often not be
     established. In the case of violence resulting in
     persistent vegetative state is concerned, we are
     reminded of the moving story of Aruna
     Shanbaug, the young nurse who was brutally
     raped and lived the rest of her life (i.e. almost
     36 years) in a persistent vegetative state.



    23. In our opinion, such situations must be treated
    differently because the concerted effort to rape

                                                                          111

               and to inflict violence may disclose an intention
               deserving an enhanced punishment. We have
               therefore recommended that a specific provision,
               namely, Section 376(3) should be inserted in the
               
Indian Penal Code
 to deal with the offence of
               “rape followed by death or resulting in a
               persistent vegetative state”.”


           61. In the present case, there are some residual doubts in
           our mind. A crucial witness for constructing the last seen
           theory, PW 5 is partly inconsistent in cross-examination
           and quickly jumps from one statement to the other. Two
           other witnesses, PW 6 and PW 7 had seen the appellant
           feeding biscuits to the deceased one year before the
           incident and their long delay in reporting the same fails to
           inspire confidence. The mother of the deceased has
           deposed that the wife and daughter of the appellant came
           to her house and demanded the return of the money which
           she had borrowed from them but failed to mention that she
           suspected the appellant of committing the crime initially.
           Ligature marks on the neck evidencing throttling were
           noted by PW 20 and PW 12 and in the post-mortem report,
           but find no mention in the panchnama prepared by the
           police. Viscera samples sent for chemical testing were
           spoilt and hence remained unexamined. Although nails’
           scrapings of the accused were collected, no report has
           been produced to show that DNA of the deceased was
           present. Another initial suspect, Baba alias Ashok Kaurav
           absconded during investigation, hence, gave rise to the
           possibility of involvement of more than one person. All
           these factors of course have no impact in formation of the
           chain of evidence and are wholly insufficient to create
           reasonable doubt to earn acquittal.



           62. We are cognizant of the fact that use of such “residual
           doubt” as a mitigating factor would effectively raise the
           standard of proof for imposing the death sentence, the
           benefit of which would be availed of not by the innocent
           only. However, it would be a misconception to make a
           cost-benefit comparison between cost to society owing to
           acquittal of one guilty versus loss of life of a perceived
           innocent. This is because the alternative to death does not
           necessarily imply setting the convict free.


           63. As noted by the United States Supreme Court in
           Herrera v. Collins, “it is an unalterable fact that our
           judicial system, like the human beings who administer it,

   (1993) SCC OnLine US SC 10 : 122 L Ed 2d 203

                                                                            112

           is fallible”. However, death being irrevocable, there lies a
           greater degree of responsibility on the court for an in-
           depth scrutiny of the entire material on record. Still
           further, qualitatively, the penalty imposed by awarding
           death is much different than in incarceration, both for the
           convict and for the State. Hence, a corresponding
           distinction in requisite standards of proof by taking note of
           “residual doubt” during sentencing would not be
           unwarranted.



           64. We are thus of the considered view that the present
           case falls short of the “rarest of rare” cases where the
           death sentence alone deserves to be awarded to the
           appellant. It appears to us in the light of all the cumulative
           circumstances that the cause of justice will be effectively
           served by invoking the concept of special sentencing
           theory as evolved by this Court in Swamy Shraddananda
           (2)69 and approved in Sriharan case92.”


46.     Since reference was made in the aforestated decisions of this Court

to certain decisions of US Supreme Court, we may now consider those

decisions and some other decisions of US Supreme Court on the point and

whether the theory of “residual doubt” has found acceptance in the

decisions of US Supreme Court.





A]                             California vs. Brown90


      (a) The relevant facts noted in the opinion of the Court delivered by

      Chief Justice Rehnquist were:-

          “Respondent Albert Brown was found guilty by a jury of
           forcible rape and first-degree murder in the death of 15-
           year-old Susan J. At the penalty phase, the State presented
           evidence that respondent had raped another young girl
           some years prior to his attack on Susan J. Respondent
           presented the testimony of several family members, who
           recounted respondent’s peaceful nature and expressed
           disbelief that respondent was capable of such a brutal
           crime. Respondent also presented the testimony of a

                                                                         113

           psychiatrist, who stated that Brown killed his victim
           because of his shame and fear over sexual dysfunction.
           Brown himself testified, stating that he was ashamed of his
           prior criminal conduct and asking for mercy from the
           jury.”



       While instructing the jury to consider the aggravating and

mitigating circumstances and to weigh them in determining the

appropriate penalty, the trial Court had cautioned the jury-

          “that it “must not be swayed by mere sentiment,
           conjecture, sympathy, passion, prejudice, public opinion or
           public feeling.”

     The instruction so issued was found to have violated the Eighth and

Fourteenth Amendments by the Supreme Court of California which

decision was reversed by US Supreme Court as under: -

          “We hold that the instruction challenged in this case does
           not violate the provisions of the Eighth and Fourteenth
           Amendments to the United States Constitution. The
           judgment of the Supreme Court of California is therefore
           reversed, and the cause is remanded for further
           proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.”




     (b) Justice O’Connor authored a concurring opinion and stated:-

           “Because the individualized assessment of the
           appropriateness of the death penalty is a moral inquiry
           into the culpability of the defendant, and not an
           emotional response to the mitigating evidence, I agree
           with the Court that an instruction informing the jury that
           they “must not be swayed by mere sentiment, conjecture,
           sympathy, passion, prejudice, public opinion or public
           feeling” does not by itself violate the Eighth and
           Fourteenth Amendments to the United States
           Constitution. At the same time, the jury instructions –
           taken as a whole – must clearly inform the jury that they
           are to consider any relevant mitigating evidence about a
           defendant’s background and character, or about the
           circumstances of the crime.”

                                                                         114


     (c) Justice Brennan (with whom Justice Marshall and Justice

     Stevens joined) dissented and observed:-

          “The prosecutor in this case thus interpreted the
          antisympathy instruction to require that the jury ignore the
          defendant’s evidence on the mitigating factors of his
          character and upbringing. A similar construction has been
          placed on the instruction in several other cases.”



     (d) Justice Blackmun (with whom Justice Marshall joined) also

     dissented and stated: -

          “The sentencer’s ability to respond with mercy towards a
          defendant has always struck me as a particularly valuable
          aspect of the capital sentencing procedure. …….



          ….In my view, we adhere so strongly to our belief that
          sentencers should have the opportunity to spare a capital
          defendant’s life on account of compassion for the
          individual because, recognizing that the capital sentencing
          decision must be made in the context of “contemporary
          values,” Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S., at 181, 96 S.Ct., at
          2928 (opinion of Stewart, POWELL, and STEVENS, JJ.),
          we see in the sentencer’s expression of mercy a distinctive
          feature of our society that we deeply value.”


      Thus, the entire discussion was confined to the validity of the

instruction given to the Jury and the issue of “residual doubt” never arose

for consideration.



B]                            Franklin v. Lynaugh89

        The jury had found Franklin guilty of capital murder. At the

conclusion of penalty hearing, the trial court submitted two “Special

Issues” to the jury, instructing the jury that if they determined the answer to

                                                                        115

both these questions to be “Yes,” Franklin would be sentenced to death.



The issues were:



         “Do you find from the evidence beyond a reasonable
         doubt that the conduct of the Defendant, Donal Gene
         Franklin, that caused the death of Mary Margaret Moran,
         was committed deliberately and with the reasonable
         expectation that the death of the deceased or another
         would result?

         Do you find from the evidence beyond a reasonable doubt
         that there is a probability that the Defendant, Donald Gene
         Franklin, would commit criminal acts of violence that
         would constitute a continuing threat to society.”


       Franklin however requested for jury instructions as follows:-
         “you are instructed that any evidence which, in your
         opinion, mitigates against the imposition of the Death,
         Penalty, including any aspect of the Defendant’s character
         or record, and any of the circumstances of the commission
         of the offense …. may be sufficient to cause you to have a
         reasonable doubt as to whether or not the true answer of
         any of the Special Issues is “Yes”; and in the event such
         evidence does cause you to have such a reasonable doubt,
         you should answer the Issue “No””


       The request of Franklin was rejected and the jury answered both

special issues in affirmative whereafter the trial Court imposed death

sentence. In Federal habeas action filed by Franklin, the submission was

recorded:-



         “Petitioner first suggests that the jury may, in its penalty
         deliberations, have harbored “residual doubts” about three
         issues considered in the guilt phase of his trial: first,
         petitioner’s identity as the murderer; second, the extent to
         which petitioner’s actions (as opposed to medical
         mistreatment) actually caused the victim’s death; and

                                                                       116

       third, the extent to which petitioner’s actions were
       intended to result in the victim’s death.”



(a) The decision of the Court was delivered by Justice White and the

question was formulated as under:-



       “In this case, we are called on to determine if the Eighth
       Amendment required a Texas trial court to give certain
       jury instructions, relating to the consideration of
       mitigating evidence, that petitioner had requested in the
       sentencing phase of his capital trial”

     Rejecting the challenge it was observed:-



       “At the outset, we note that this Court has never held that
       a capital defendant has a constitutional right to an
       instruction telling the jury to revisit the question of his
       identity as the murderer as a basis for mitigation.



                               …    …    …

       Our edict that, in a capital case, " 'the sentencer . . . may
       not be precluded from considering, as a mitigating factor,
       any aspect of a defendant's character or record and any of
       the circumstances of the offense,' " Eddings v. Oklahoma,
       455 U.S. 104, 110, 102 S.Ct. 869, 874, 71 L.Ed.2d 1
       (1982) (quoting Lockett, 438 U.S., at 604, 98 S.Ct., at
       2964), in no way mandates reconsideration by capital
       juries, in the sentencing phase, of their "residual doubts"

       over a defendant's guilt. Such lingering doubts are not over
       any aspect of petitioner's "character," "record," or a
       "circumstance of the offense." This Court's prior decisions,
       as we understand them, fail to recognize a constitutional
       right to have such doubts considered as a mitigating
       factor."





b)     Justice O’Connor (with whom Justice Blackmun joined)

authored a concurring judgement and the submission of Franklin was

noted as under:-

                                                                                          117


             “Petitioner also contends that the sentencing procedures
             followed in his case prevented the jury from considering,
             in mitigation of sentence, any “residual doubt[s]” it might
             have had about his guilt. Petitioner uses the phrase
             “residual doubts” to refer to doubts that may have lingered
             in the minds of jurors who were convinced of his guilt
             beyond a reasonable doubt, but who were not absolutely
             certain of his guilt. Brief for Petitioner 14. The plurality
             and dissent reject petitioner's “residual doubt” claim
             because they conclude that the special verdict questions
             did not prevent the jury from giving mitigating effect to its
             “residual doubts” about petitioner's guilt. See ante at 2328:

             post, at 2335. This conclusion is open to question,
             however. Although the jury was permitted to consider
             evidence presented at the guilt phase in the course of
             answering the special verdict questions, the jury was
             specifically instructed to decide whether the evidence
             supported affirmative answers to the special questions
             “beyond a reasonable doubt.” App. 15 (emphasis added).
             Because of this instruction, the jury might not have
             thought that, in sentencing the petitioner, it was free to
             demand proof of his guilt beyond all doubt.”



          Justice O’Connor rejected the submission and observed: -



             “In my view, petitioner's "residual doubt" claim fails, not
             because the Texas scheme allowed for consideration of
             "residual doubt" by the sentencing body, but rather
             because the Eighth Amendment does not require it. Our
             cases do not support the proposition that a defendant who
             has been found to be guilty of a capital crime beyond a
             reasonable doubt has a constitutional right to
             reconsideration by the sentencing body of lingering doubts
             about his guilt. We have recognized that some States have
             adopted capital sentencing procedures that permit
             defendants in some cases to enjoy the benefit of doubts
             that linger from the guilt phase of the trial, see Lockhart v.
             McCree, 476 U.S. 162, 181, 106 S.Ct. 1758, 1769, 90
             L.Ed.2d 137 (1986), but we have never indicated that the
             Eighth Amendment requires States to adopt such
             procedures. To the contrary, as the plurality points out, we
             have approved capital sentencing procedures that preclude
             consideration by the sentencing body of "residual doubts"
             about guilt. See ante, at 2327, n. 6.



   The footnote reads thus:-

    “Finding a constitutional right to rely on a guilt-phase jury’s “residual doubts” about
    innocence when the defense presents its mitigating case in the penalty phase is

                                                                                         118


           Our decisions mandating jury consideration of mitigating
           circumstances provide no support for petitioner's claim
           because "residual doubt" about guilt is not a mitigating
           circumstance. We have defined mitigating circumstances
           as facts about the defendant's character or background, or
           the circumstances of the particular offense, that may call
           for a penalty less than death. See California v. Brown, 479
           U.S., at 541, 107 S.Ct., at 839; id., at 544, 107 S.Ct., at
           840 (O'CONNOR, J., concurring); Eddings, 455 U.S., at
           110, 112, 102 S.Ct., at 874, 875; id., at 117, 102 S.Ct., at
           878 (O'CONNOR, J., concurring); Lockett, 438 U.S., at
           605, 98 S.Ct., at 2965. "Residual doubt" is not a fact about
           the defendant or the circumstances of the crime. It is
           instead a lingering uncertainty about facts, a state of mind
           that exists somewhere between "beyond a reasonable
           doubt" and "absolute certainty." Petitioner's "residual
           doubt" claim is that the States must permit capital
           sentencing bodies to demand proof of guilt to "an absolute
           certainty" before imposing the death sentence. Nothing in
           our cases mandates the imposition of this heightened
           burden of proof at capital sentencing.



                                                      (Emphasis supplied)


        During the course of her judgment, Justice O’Connor also made

following observations: -





 
arguably inconsistent with the common practice of allowing penalty-only trials on
  remand of cases where a death sentence-but not the underlying conviction-is struck
  down on appeal. See, e.g. 
Scott v. State
, 310 Md. 277, 301, 529 A.2d 340, 352 (1987);
  Stringer v. State, 492 A.2d 928, 946 (Miss.1986); 
Whalen v. State
, 492 A.2d 552, 569
  (Del.1985).
 Cf. Lockhart v. McCree, 476 U.S., at 205, 106 S.Ct., at 1781
  (MARSHALL, J. dissenting).



  In fact, this Court has, on several previous occasions, suggested such a method of
  proceeding on remand, See, e.g. , Hitchcock v. Dugger, 481 U.S. 393, 399, 107 S.Ct.
  1821, 1824, 95 L.Ed.2d 347 (1987). Moreover, petitioner himself, in suggesting the
  appropriate relief in this case, asked only that he be “resentenced in a proceeding that
  comports with requirements of Lockett” – not that he be retried in full so as to have
  the benefit of any potential guilt-phase “residual doubts.” See Brief for petitioner 21.



  In sum, we are quite doubtful that such “penalty-only” trials are violative of a
  defendant’s Eighth Amendment rights. Yet such is the logical conclusion of
  petitioner’s claim of a constitutional right to argue “residual doubts” to a capital
  sentencing jury.”

                                                                            119

            “In my view, the principle underlying Lockett, Eddings,
            and Hitchcock is that punishment should be directly
            related to the personal culpability of the criminal
            defendant.



            “Evidence about the defendant’s background and character
            is relevant because of the belief, long held by this society,
            that defendants who commit criminal acts that are
            attributable to a disadvantaged background, or to
            emotional and mental problems, may be less culpable than
            defendants who have no such excuse…. Thus, the
            sentence imposed at the penalty stage should reflect a
            reasoned moral response to the defendant’s background,
            character, and crime.” California v. Brown, 479 U.S.538,
            545, 107 S.Ct. 837, 841, 93 L.Ed.2d 934 (1987)
            (O’CONNOR, J., concurring) (emphasis in original)

            In light of this principle it is clear that a State may not
            constitutionally prevent the sentencing body from giving
            effect to evidence relevant to the defendant’s background
            or character or the circumstances of the offense that
            mitigates against the death penalty. Indeed, the right to
            have the sentencer consider and weigh relevant mitigating
            evidence would be meaningless unless the sentencer was
            also permitted to give effect to its consideration.



            Under the sentencing procedure followed in this case the
            jury could express its views about the appropriate
            punishment only by answering the special verdict
            questions regarding the deliberations of the murder and the
            defendant’s future dangerousness. To the extent that the
            mitigating evidence introduced by petitioner was relevant
            to one of the special verdict questions, the jury was free to
            give effect to that evidence by returning a negative answer
            to that question. If, however, petitioner had introduced
            mitigating evidence about his background or character or
            the circumstances of the crime that was not relevant to the
            special verdict questions, or that had relevance to the
            defendant’s moral culpability beyond the scope of the
            special verdict questions, the jury instructions would have
            provided the jury with no vehicle for expressing its
            “reasoned moral responds” to that evidence.”

                                …    …    …



   438 U.S. 586, 98 S.Ct. 2954, 57 L.Ed.2d 973 (1978)
   455 U.S. 104, 102 S.Ct. 869. 71 L.Ed.2d 1 (1982)
   481 U.S. 393, 107 S.Ct. 1821, 95 L.Ed.2d 347 (1987)

                                                                           120

           Noting in Lockett or Eddings requires that the sentencing
           authority be permitted to give effect to evidence beyond
           the extent to which it is relevant to the defendant’s
           character or background or the circumstances of the
           offense.”



     (c)    The dissenting opinion authored by Justice Stevens (joined by

     Justice Brennan and Justice Marshall) stated: -



           “In requiring that the discretion of the sentencer in capital
           sentencing be guided, we have never suggested that the
           sentencer’s discretion could be guided by blinding it to
           relevant evidence. The hallmark of a sentencing scheme
           that sufficiently guides and directs the sentencer is the
           presence of procedures that “require the jury to consider
           the circumstances of the crime and the criminal before it
           recommends sentence.” Id., at 197, 96 S.Ct., at 2936. The
           requirement that the State not bar the sentencer from
           considering any mitigating aspect of the offense or the
           offender only furthers the goal of focusing the sentencer’s
           attention on the defendant and the particular circumstances
           of the crime.”



C]                             Herrera Vs. Collins94

     The syllabus prepared by the Reporter of Decisions summed up the

facts as under :-



           “On the basis of proof which included two eyewitness
           identifications, numerous pieces of circumstantial
           evidence, and petitioner Herrera’s handwritten letter
           impliedly admitting his guilt, Herrera was convicted of the
           capital murder of Police Officer Carrisalez and sentenced
           to death in January 1982. After pleading guilty, in July
           1982, to the related capital murder of Officer Rucker,
           Herrera unsuccessfully challenged the Carrisalez
           conviction on direct appeal and in two collateral
           proceedings in the Texas state courts, and in a federal
           habeas petition. Ten years after his conviction, he urged in
           second federal habeas proceeding that newly discovered
           evidence demonstrated that he was “actually innocent” of

                                                                          121

          the murders of Carrisalez and Rucker, and that the Eighth
          Amendment’s prohibition against cruel and unusual
          punishment and the Fourteenth Amendment’s due process
          guarantee therefore forbid his execution. He supported this
          claim with affidavits tending to show that his now-dead
          brother had committed the murders. The District Court,
          inter alia, granted his request for a stay of execution so
          that he could present his actual innocence claim and the
          supporting affidavits in state court. In vacating the stay,
          the Court of Appeals held that the claim was not
          cognizable on federal habeas absent, an accompanying
          federal constitutional violation.”


     Rejecting federal habeas petition preferred by Herrera, Chief Justice

Rehnquist delivered the opinion of the Court and stated: -



          “… … In capital cases, we have required additional
          protections because of the nature of the penalty at stake.
          See, e.g., Beck v. Alabama, 447 U.S. 625, 100 S.Ct. 2382,
          65 L.Ed.2d 392 (1980) (jury must be given option of
          convicting the defendant of a lesser offense). All of these
          constitutional safeguards, of course, make it more difficult
          for the State to rebut and finally overturn the presumption
          of innocence which attaches to every criminal defendant.

          But we have also observed that “ due process does not
          require that every conceivable step be taken, at whatever
          cost, to eliminate the possibility of convicting an innocent
          person.” Patterson v. New York, 432 U.S. 197, 208, 97
          S.Ct. 2319, 2326, 53 L.Ed.2d 281 (1977). To conclude
          otherwise would all but paralyze our system for
          enforcement of the criminal law.

                          …           …              …

          Petitioner asserts that this case is different because he has
          been sentenced to death. But we have “refused to hold that
          the fact that a death sentence has been imposed requires a
          different standard of review on federal habeas corpus.”
          Murray v. Giarratano, 492 U.
S. 1
, 
9
, 109 S.Ct. 2765,
          2770, 106 L.Ed.2d 1 91989) (plurality opinion). We have,
          of course, held that the Eighth Amendment requires
          increased reliability of the process by which capital
          punishment may be imposed. See, e.g., McKoy v. North
          Carolina, 494 U.S.433, 110 S.Ct. 1227, 108 L.Ed.2d 369
          (1990) (unanimity requirement impermissibly limits
          jurors’ consideration of mitigating evidence); Eddings v.
          Oklahoma, 455 U.S. 104, 102 S.Ct. 869, 71 L.Ed.2d 1

                                                                          122

          (1982) (jury must be allowed to consider all of a capital
          defendant’s mitigating character evidence); Lockett v.
          Ohio, 438 U.S. 586, 604, 98 S.Ct. 2954, 2964, 57 L.Ed.2d
          973 (1978|) (plurality opinion) (same). But petitioner’s
          claim does not fit well into the doctrine of these cases,
          since, as we have pointed out, it is far from clear that a
          second trial 10 years after the first trial would produce a
          more reliable result.



          Perhaps mindful of this, petitioner urges not that he
          necessarily receive a new trial, but that his death sentence
          simply be vacated if a federal habeas court deems that a
          satisfactory showing of “actual innocence” has been made.
          Tr. Of Oral Arg. 19-20. But such a result is scarcely
          logical; petitioner’s claim is not that some error was made
          in imposing a capital sentence upon him, but that a
          fundamental error was made in finding him guilty of the
          underlying murder in the first place. It would be a rather
          strange jurisprudence, in these circumstances, which held
          that under our Constitution he could not be executed, but
          that he could spend the rest of his life in prison.

                        …                   …               …

          Executive clemency has provided “fail safe” in our
          criminal justice system. K. Moore, Pardons: Justice,
          Mercy, and the Public Interest 131 (1989). It is an
          unalterable fact that our judicial system, like the human
          beings who administer it, is fallible. But history is replete
          with examples of wrongfully convicted persons who have
          been pardoned in the wake of after-discovered evidence
          establishing their innocence……”



     Justice O’Connor (joined by Justice Kennedy) delivered a concurring

opinion. Justice Scalia (joined by Justice Thomas) also rendered a

concurring opinion. Another concurring opinion was rendered by Justice

White, while Justice Blackmun (joined by Justice Stevens and Justice

Souter) dissented.

                                                                            123


D]                              Oregon vs. Guzek

       The syllabus prepared by the Reporter of Decisions stated the facts as

under :-



            “At the guilt phase of respondent Guzek’s capital murder
            trial, his mother was one of two witnesses who testified
            that he had been with her on the night the crime was
            committed. He was convicted and sentenced to death.
            Twice, the Oregon Supreme Court vacated the sentence
            and ordered new sentencing proceedings, but each time
            Guzek was again sentenced to death. Upon vacating his
            sentence for a third time, the State Supreme Court held
            that the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments provide
            Guzek a federal constitutional right to introduce live alibi
            testimony from his mother at the upcoming resentencing
            proceeding. After this Court granted certiorari, Guzek filed
            a motion to dismiss the writ as improvidently granted.”


       The decision of the Oregon Supreme Court was reversed by US

Supreme Court. The opinion of the Court was delivered by Justice Breyer

with following observations:-



            “4. As our discussion in Part II, supra, makes clear, the
            federal question before us is a narrow one. Do the Eighth
            and Fourteenth Amendments grant Guzek a constitutional
            right to present evidence of the kind he seeks to introduce,
            namely, new evidence that shows he was not present at the
            scene of the crime. That evidence is inconsistent with
            Guzek's prior conviction. It sheds no light on the
            manner in which he committed the crime for which he has
            been convicted. Nor is it evidence that Guzek contends
            was unavailable to him at the time of the original trial.
            And, to the extent it is evidence he introduced at that time,
            he is free to introduce it now, albeit in transcript
            form. Ore.Rev.Stat. § 138.012(2)(b) (2003). We can find
            nothing in the Eighth or Fourteenth Amendments that
            provides a capital defendant a right to introduce new
            evidence of this kind at sentencing.



    546 US 517 (2006)

                                                                             124

               We cannot agree with the Oregon Supreme Court that our
               previous cases have found in the Eighth Amendment a
               constitutional right broad enough to encompass the
               evidence here at issue. In Lockett v. Ohio, supra, a
               plurality of this Court decided that a defendant convicted
               of acting in concert with others to rob and to kill could
               introduce at the sentencing stage evidence that she had
               played a minor role in the crime, indeed, that she had
               remained outside the shop (where the killing took place) at
               the time of the crime. A plurality of the Court wrote that,

                       “the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments
                      require that the sentencer ... not be precluded
                      from considering, as a mitigating factor, any
                      aspect of a defendant's character or record
                      and any of the circumstances of the offense
                      that the defendant proffers as a basis for a
                      sentence less than death.” Id., at 604, 98 S.Ct.
                      2954 (emphasis added and deleted).



               And in Eddings v. Oklahoma, 455 U.S. 104, 102 S.Ct. 869,
               71 L.Ed.2d 1, the Court majority adopted this statement.

               See also McCleskey v. Kemp, 481 U.S. 279, 306, 107 S.Ct.
               1756, 95 L.Ed.2d 262 (1987); Bell v. Ohio, 438 U.S. 637,
               642, 98 S.Ct. 2977, 57 L.Ed.2d 1010 (1978) (plurality
               opinion).



               But the evidence at issue in these cases was traditional
               sentence-related evidence, evidence that tended to
               show how, not whether, the defendant committed the
               crime. Nor was the evidence directly inconsistent with the
               jury's finding of guilt.”


          Justice Scalia (joined by Justice Thomas) delivered a concurring

     opinion

     E]                             Abdul Kabir vs. Quarterman

          In this case, the theory of “residual doubt” did not come up for

     consideration. However in the judgement of the Court delivered by Justice




 550 US 233 (2007)

                                                                          125

Stevens, the opinion of Justice O’Connor in Franklin vs. Lynaugh89 was

referred to as under:-



          “What makes Franklin significant, however, is the
          separate opinion of Justice O’Connor, and particularly
          those portions of her opinion expressing the views of five
          Justices, see infra, at 1668 – 1669, and n.15. After
          summarizing the cases that clarified Jurek’s holding she
          worte:



                   “In my view, the principle underlying
                   Lockett, Eddings, and Hitchcock is that
                   punishment should be directly related to the
                   personal culpability of the criminal
                   defendant.



          “Evidence about the defendant’s background and character
          is relevant because of the belief, long held by this society,
          that defendants who commit criminal acts that are
          attributable to a disadvantaged background, or to
          emotional and mental problems, may be less culpable than
          defendants who have no such excuse …. Thus, the
          sentence imposed at the penalty stage should reflect a
          reasoned moral response to the defendant’s background,
          character, and crime.’ California v. Brown, 479 U.S. 538,
          545, 107 S.Ct. 837, 93 L.Ed.2d 934 (1987) (O’Connor, J.,
          concurring) (emphasis in original).



          “In light of this principle it is clear that a State may not
          constitutionally prevent the sentencing body from giving
          effect to the evidence relevant to the defendant’s
          background or character or the circumstances of the
          offense that mitigates against the death penalty. Indeed,
          the right to have the sentencer consider and weigh
          relevant mitigating evidence would be meaningless unless
          the sentencer was also permitted to give effect to its
          consideration.



          “Under the sentencing procedure followed in this case the
          jury could express its views about the appropriate
          punishment only by answering the special verdict
          questions regarding the deliberateness of the murder and
          the defendant’s future dangerousness. To the extent that
          the mitigating evidence introduced by petitioner was
          relevant to one of the special verdict questions, the jury
          was free to give effect to that evidence by returning a
          negative answer to that question. If, however, petitioner
          had introduced mitigating evidence about his background

                                                                          126

          or character or the circumstances of the crime that was not
          relevant to the special verdict questions, or that had
          relevance to the defendant’s moral culpability beyond the
          scope of the special verdict questions, the jury instructions
          would have provided the jury with no vehicle for
          expressing its ‘reasoned moral response’ to that evidence.”
          487 U.S. at 184-185, 108 S.Ct. 2320 (opinion concurring
          in Judgment) (emphasis added).”




47.     We may also note the decision of the Supreme Court of Tennessee

in State vs. Mckinney93, as it was referred to in the decision of this Court in

Ravishankar alias 
Baba Vishwakarma vs. State of Madhya Pradesh20
.


      In that case, the Defence Counsel sought to refer to the evidence

from the “Guilt Phase” of the trial during his closing argument in the

sentencing phase of the trial. Whether the decision in not permitting him to

do so was correct, was the issue.

       The opinion of the Court observed: -



          “Residual doubt evidence,” in general, may consist of
          proof admitted during the sentencing phase that indicates
          the defendant did not commit the offense, notwithstanding
          the jury’s verdict following the guilt phase. …..”

                                  …    …    …

          “In contrast, the present case does not involve a
          resentencing procedure, nor does it involve a defendant’s
          effort to introduce evidence of residual doubt. Instead, the
          defendant only sought to argue evidence that had already
          been admitted by the trial court and heard by the same jury
          in the guilt phase of the trial. …..”

                                  …    …    …

          “…..Moreover, given that this was not a resentencing
          hearing, the reality is that the sentencing jury had already
          heard the testimony underlying defense counsel’s
          proposed argument and had reconciled it in favor of the
          State’s theory of guilt and against the defendant’s theory
          of innocence. ...”

                                                                          127



       It was concluded: -



          “….. (4) the trail court’s refusal to allow defense counsel
          to refer to evidence from the guilt phase of the trial during
          his closing argument in the sentencing phase of the trial
          did not affect the jury’s determination to the prejudice of
          the defendant and was harmless error. …..”



48.      The principles that emerge from the decisions of U.S. Supreme

Court are: -



          (i) “….this Court has never held that a capital defendant
          has a constitutional right to an instruction telling the jury
          to revisit the question of his identity as the murderer as a
          basis for mitigation.….”


          Justice White speaking for the Court in Franklin vs. Lynaugh89.



          (ii) “….Our edict that, in a capital case, " 'the
          sentencer . . . [may] not be precluded from considering, as
          a mitigating factor, any aspect of a defendant's character
          or record and any of the circumstances of the offense,' …..

          in no way mandates reconsideration by capital juries, in
          the sentencing phase, of their "residual doubts" over a
          defendant's guilt. ..."




          Justice White speaking for the Court in Franklin vs. Lynaugh89.


          (iii)        “…… Our cases do not support the
          proposition that a defendant who has been found to be
          guilty of a capital crime beyond a reasonable doubt has a
          constitutional right to reconsideration by the sentencing
          body of lingering doubts about his guilt…..”

          Justice O’Connor in concurring opinion in Franklin vs.
          Lynaugh89

                                                               128


(iv) “… we have approved capital sentencing procedures
that preclude consideration by the sentencing body of
"residual doubts" about guilt. …”

Justice O’Connor in concurring opinion in Franklin vs.
Lynaugh89.





(v) “…..Our decisions mandating jury consideration of
mitigating circumstances provide no support for
petitioner's claim because "residual doubt" about guilt is
not a mitigating circumstance. …..”


Justice O’Connor in concurring opinion in Franklin vs.
Lynaugh89.



(vi) "… Residual doubt" is not a fact about the defendant
or the circumstances of the crime. It is instead a lingering
uncertainty about facts, a state of mind that exists
somewhere between "beyond a reasonable doubt" and
"absolute certainty." Petitioner's "residual doubt" claim is
that the States must permit capital sentencing bodies to
demand proof of guilt to "an absolute certainty" before
imposing the death sentence. Nothing in our cases
mandates the imposition of this heightened burden of
proof at capital sentencing. (Emphasis added)”

Justice O’Connor in concurring opinion in Franklin vs.
Lynaugh89.



(vii) “…In capital cases, we have required additional
protections because of the nature of the penalty at stake.
….. (jury must be given option of convicting the
defendant of a lesser offense). All of these constitutional
safeguards, of course, make it more difficult for the State
to rebut and finally overturn the presumption of innocence
which attaches to every criminal defendant. But we have
also observed that “due process does not require that every
conceivable step be taken, at whatever cost, to eliminate
the possibility of convicting an innocent person.” ….. To
conclude otherwise would all but paralyze our system for
enforcement of the criminal law.”

                                                                       129

         Chief Justice Rehnquist speaking for the Court in Herrera Vs.
         Collins94.



         (viii) “…..It would be a rather strange jurisprudence, in
         these circumstances, which held that under our
         Constitution he could not be executed, but that he could
         spend the rest of his life in prison. …..”

         Chief Justice Rehnquist speaking for the Court in Herrera Vs.
         Collins94.

         (ix) “….. Do the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments
         grant Guzek a constitutional right to present evidence of
         the kind he seeks to introduce, namely, new evidence that
         shows he was not present at the scene of the crime. That
         evidence is inconsistent with Guzek's prior conviction. It
         sheds no light on the manner in which he committed the
         crime for which he has been convicted. …..”

         Justice Breyer speaking for the Court in Oregon vs. Guzek99.


         (x) “….. But the evidence at issue in these cases was
         traditional sentence-related evidence, evidence that tended
         to show how, not whether, the defendant committed the
         crime. Nor was the evidence directly inconsistent with the
         jury's finding of guilt. …..”

         Justice Breyer speaking for the Court in Oregon vs. Guzek99.



         (xi)        “The sentencer’s ability to respond with

         mercy towards a defendant has always struck me as a

         particularly valuable aspect of the capital sentencing

         procedure. …….”


       The observations in the dissenting opinion of Justice Blackmun in
       California vs. Brown90.



49.    Following features from these decisions of U.S. Supreme Court are

noteworthy: -

                                                                          130


(A)       As the decision in California vs. Brown90 discloses, the jury trial

comprises of two phases. The first is called “Guilt Phase” where the

question for determination is whether the offence as alleged has been

proved by the prosecution which is akin to “conviction stage” in our

jurisprudence; while the second phase is called “Penalty Phase” at which

stage the question for consideration is about the appropriate penalty to be

awarded when the guilt is established which is similar to “sentence stage”

in our jurisprudence.



        In both the phases, the basic issues are to be dealt with by jurors who

are drawn from cross sections of the society, while the function for such

determination and consideration in our jurisprudence is entrusted to

judicial officers adequately trained and appropriately equipped with

practical experience.      A jury is likely to be swayed by emotions or

sentiments, which is why the caution was given to the jury by the trial

court in California vs. Brown90. But that element or possibility gets ruled

out when an experienced judicial officer is entrusted with the requisite

task.




(B)        Secondly, there can be fresh sentencing procedure on as many as

four occasions as the decision in Oregon vs.           Guzek99 shows or the

process of challenge may take considerable time as the decision in

Herrera vs. Collins94 discloses. Naturally, there would be some time gap

                                                                        131

between two phases, possibly leading to a situation where the composition

of the jury at the “Penalty Phase” may not be same as it was at the “Guilt

Phase”. Consequently, the attempts on part of the defence to highlight

any area or aspect in the evidence which could be said to be doubtful in

the hope that there could be a change in perception. This possibility again

does not arise in our jurisprudence, as the same judicial officer who heard

and decided the matter at the conviction stage is to decide the matter at the

sentence stage and without any undue lapse of time.

(C)     At the “Penalty Phase”, the Prosecutor and the Defence are

allowed to lead evidence. Whether such leading of evidence may also

include evidence touching upon the identity of the Accused or his role in

the transaction or any matter concerning evidence leading to

determination of his guilt were the issues in Oregon vs. Guzek99 and the

portion extracted from that decision shows the approach adopted by US

Supreme Court. In our jurisprudence, if there be any new evidence which

may go to the root of the matter, leading of such evidence can be

permitted at the appellate stage subject to fulfilment of governing

principles.

        These features are only illustrative to say that the theory of

“residual doubt” that got developed was a result of peculiarity in the

process adopted. Even then, what is material to note is that the theory has

consistently been rejected by U.S. Supreme Court and as stated by Justice

                                                                      132

O’Connor: - “Nothing in our cases mandated the imposition of this

heightened burden of proof at capital sentencing”.




50.    (A)    In Ashok Debbarma18, after noticing the decisions of US

Supreme Court in California vs. Brown90 and in Franklin vs. Lynaugh89,

it was observed that “residual doubt” as a mitigating circumstance did not

find favour with various Courts in the United States.


       On facts, it was however observed that the Court entertained

“lingering doubt” as to “whether the appellant alone could have executed

the crime single-handedly, especially when the prosecution itself says that

it was handiwork of a large group of people”. Thus, the doubt that was

entertained was not about the guilt of the accused simpliciter or about his

involvement in the crime but whether the appellant alone could have

committed the crime which resulted in the death of as many as 35 persons

and such doubt weighed with the Court while commuting death sentence to

imprisonment for life.



       It must be stated here that what was paraphrased in paragraph 33 of

the decision was the relevant portion from the opinion of Justice O’Connor

in Franklin v. Lynaugh89 and not from the decision in California v.

Brown90.

                                                                      133


 
(B)    In Sudam alias 
Rahul Kaniram Jadhav v. State of

Maharashtra19
, it was noted in paragraph 19.1 that there would be no bar

on the award of death sentence in cases based on circumstantial evidence.


Thereafter, the decision in Ashok Debbarma18 was considered and the

Court observed that in several cases, “quality of evidence to a higher

standard” was insisted upon for passing the irrevocable sentence of death

and reliance was placed on the decision in 
Mohd. Mannan vs. State of

Bihar80
. The deduction in paragraph 21 rested inter alia on the aspect that

“the nature of the circumstantial evidence in this case amounts to a

circumstance significant enough to tilt the balance of aggravating and

mitigating circumstances in the petitioner’s favour”.


 
(C)    In Ravishankar20 it was observed that “imposition of a

higher standard of proof for the purposes of death sentencing over and

above beyond reasonable doubt necessary for criminal conviction is

similar to the residual doubt metric adopted by this Court in 
Ashok

Debbarma vs. State of Tripura18…”
. In this case, as per paragraph 10 of

the decision, blood samples of six suspects were sent for DNA analysis

but only DNA profile from the blood of the appellant matched with that

from the vaginal slide of the deceased. Additionally, reliance was placed

by the prosecution on the testimony of PWs 5, 6 and 7, as set out in

paragraphs 17 and 18. The reason why the version coming from PWs 5, 6

                                                                      134

and 7 could not inspire complete confidence was dealt with in paragraph


61. It was further observed that another suspect Baba alias Ashok Kaurav

having absconded during investigation, there was possibility of

involvement of more than one person, giving rise to the same safety filter

adopted in Ashok Debbarma18.





51.    These cases thus show that the matters were considered from the

standpoint of individual fact situation where, going by the higher or

stricter standard for imposition of death penalty, alternative to death

sentence was found to be appropriate.





52.    When it comes to cases based on circumstantial evidence in our

jurisprudence, the standard that is adopted in terms of law 
laid down by


this Court as noticed in Sharad Birdhichand Sarda34 and subsequent

decisions is that the circumstances must not only be individually proved

or established, but they must form a consistent chain, so conclusive as to

rule out the possibility of any other hypothesis except the guilt of the

accused. On the strength of these principles, the burden in such cases is

already of a greater magnitude. Once that burden is discharged, it is

implicit that any other hypothesis or the innocence of the accused, already

stands ruled out when the matter is taken up at the stage of sentence after

returning the finding of guilt. So, theoretically the concept or theory of

                                                                       135

“residual doubt” does not have any place in a case based on

circumstantial evidence. As a matter of fact, the theory of residual doubt

was never accepted by US Supreme Court as discussed earlier.



       However, as summed up in Kalu Khan17, while dealing with cases

based on circumstantial evidence, for imposition of a death sentence,

higher or stricter standard must be insisted upon. The approach to be

adopted in matters concerning capital punishment, therefore ought to be in

conformity with the principles culled out in paragraph 41 hereinabove and

the instant matter must therefore be considered in the light of those

principles.



53.     If the present case is so considered, the discussion must broadly be

classified under following two heads: -



(A)      Whether the circumstantial evidence in the present case is of

unimpeachable character in establishing the guilt of the Appellant or leads

to an exceptional case.



(B)      Whether the evidence on record is so strong and convincing that

the option of a sentence lesser than a death penalty is foreclosed.



        Going by the circumstances proved on record and, more

particularly the facets detailed in paragraph 19 hereinabove as well as the

law 
laid down by
 this Court in series of decisions, the circumstances on

                                                                        136

record rule out any hypothesis of innocence of the Appellant. The

circumstances are clear, consistent and conclusive in nature and are of

unimpeachable character in establishing the guilt of the Appellant. The

evidence on record also depicts an exceptional case where two and half

years old girl was subjected to sexual assault. The assault was

accompanied by bites on the body of the victim. The rape was of such

intensity that there was merging of vaginal and anal orifices of the victim.

The age of the victim, the fact that the Appellant was a maternal uncle of

the victim and the intensity of the assault make the present case an

exceptional one.



        However, if the case is considered against the second head, we do

not find that the option of a sentence lesser than death penalty is

completely foreclosed. It is true that the sexual assault was very severe and

the conduct of the Appellant could be termed as perverse and barbaric.

However, a definite pointer in favour of the Appellant is the fact that he did

not consciously cause any injury with the intent to extinguish the life of the

victim. Though all the injuries are attributable to him and it was injury

No.17 which was the cause of death, his conviction under 
Section 302
 IPC

is not under any of the first three clauses of 
Section 300
 IPC. In matters

where the conviction is recorded with the aid of clause fourthly under


Section 300
 of IPC, it is very rare that the death sentence is awarded. In

                                                                       137

cases at Serial Nos. 10, 11, 16, 24, 40, 45 and 64 of the Chart tabulated in

paragraph 30 hereinabove, where the victims were below 16 years of age

and had died during the course of sexual assault on them, the maximum

sentence awarded was life sentence. This aspect is of crucial importance

while considering whether the option of a sentence lesser than death

penalty is foreclosed or not.



54.    We therefore, find that though the Appellant is guilty of the offence

punishable under 
Section 302
 IPC, since there was no requisite intent as

would bring the case under any of the first three clauses of 
Section 300


IPC, the offence in the present case does not deserve death penalty.



55.    The second count on which death sentence has been imposed is

under 
Section 376A
 of IPC. As noted earlier, the offence was committed

on 11.02.2013 and just few days before such commission, Section 376A

was inserted in 
IPC
 by the Ordinance. As concluded by us in paragraph 16

hereinabove, the ex-post facto effect given to Section 376A inserted by the

Amendment Act would not in any way be inconsistent with sub-Article (1)

of 
Article 20
 of the Constitution. The Appellant is thus definitely guilty of

the offence punishable under 
Section 376A
 IPC. But the question remains

whether punishment lesser than death sentence gets ruled out or not. As

against 
Section 302
 IPC while dealing with cases under 
Section 376A
 IPC,

a wider spectrum is available for consideration by the Courts      as to the

                                                                      138

punishment to be awarded. On the basis of the same aspects that weighed

with us while considering the appropriate punishment for the offence under


Section 302
 IPC, in view of the fact that 
Section 376A
 IPC was brought on

the statute book just few days before the commission of the offence, the

Appellant does not deserve death penalty for said offence.



       At the same time, considering the nature and enormity of the

offence, it must be observed that the appropriate punishment for the

offence under 
Section 376A
 IPC must be rigorous imprisonment for a term

of 25 years.



56.    In view of the aforestated conclusions drawn by us, it is not

necessary to deal with the submissions IV, V, VI, VII, VIII and IX,

advanced by Ms. Mathur, learned Senior Advocate in respect of the issue

of sentence.



57.    Consequently, while affirming the view taken by the Courts below

in recording conviction of the Appellant for the offences punishable under


Sections 302
 IPC and 376A 
IPC
, we commute the sentence to life

imprisonment for the offence punishable under 
Section 302
 IPC and to that

of rigorous imprisonment for 25 years for the offence punishable under


Section 376A
 IPC. The conviction and sentence recorded by the Courts

below for the offences punishable under Section 376(1), (2)(f), (i) and (m)

of 
IPC
, and under 
Section 6
 of the POCSO Act are affirmed.

                                                                 139


58.   These appeals are allowed to the aforesaid extent.





                                                   ……………………J.
                                                   (Uday Umesh Lalit)



                                                   ……………………J.
                                                   (Indu Malhotra)



                                                   …………………….J.
                                                   (Krishna Murari)
New Delhi;

November 02, 2020.