[Cites 
17
, Cited by 
1
]




Delhi High Court


Manoj Kumar vs State (Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi) on 17 September, 2008


Author: 
Gita Mittal


Bench: 
Gita Mittal


               IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

                   Crl.Rev.P. No.184/2009

                        Date of decision: 17th September, 2008

     MANOJ KUMAR                              ... Petitioner
                      through: Mr. Virendra Kumar, Adv. with
                               Mr. P.K. Arya, Adv.

                              VERSUS

     STATE (GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI)             ....Respondents
                   through: Ms. Fizani Husain, APP for the State
                            with SI Jagdish Yadav, PS Subzi
                            Mandi.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
       1.Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
          see the Judgment?                        Yes
       2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?   Yes
       3.Whether the judgment should be reported in the
       Digest?                                     Yes

 GITA MITTAL, J (Oral)

*

1.    By this petition, the petitioner assails an order dated 21st

February, 2009 passed by the learned ASJ whereby the court has

admitted the petitioner to bail subject to his furnishing a bail bond of

Rs.20,000/- with two sureties of the like amount to the satisfaction of

the Metropolitan Magistrate with the condition that at the time of bail,

the applicant shall deposit a draft of Rs.2,00,000/- in court which shall

be released to either of the parties after completion of the trial.


2.    The principal ground of challenge to the order passed by the

learned Sessions Judge is premised on a submission of lack of

jurisdiction of the learned court to impose such condition. It is urged




                                 -1-

 that there is no statutory provision nor any judicial pronouncement

based whereon the learned court would have the authority in law to

impose such condition upon a person at the time of granting bail to

him or her.



3.   In the instant case, the prosecution has contended that the

petitioner stands implicated in a complaint lodged by the Punjab

National Bank, Subzi Mandi Branch, Delhi to the effect that he has

taken payment of Rs.98,000/- from their branch on 30th August, 2007.

A complaint was lodged by the Punjab National Bank that one Ashok

Kumar has taken payment from their branch through a bearer cheque

issued by Ajay Kumar from an account maintained at their branch

office at district Daurala, Meerut. During investigation, a co-accused

Subhodh Kumar disclosed that the petitioner was his relative and they

used to commit theft from the postal department as well as from

persons involved in courier service.   Demand drafts were removed

from envelopes and after making alterations, the amounts of these

demand drafts were withdrawn by depositing them in fake and

fictitious accounts opened in different banks.   These considerations

have weighed with the learned Additional Sessions Judge who while

admitting the complaint to bail has imposed the condition of deposit of

Rs.2,00,000/- upon the petitioner.



4.   This petition has been necessitated for the reason that the

petitioner has not complied with the condition and remains in judicial

custody since 19th September, 2008.     The petitioner has contended

that he is the sole earning member of the family which consists of his



                               -2-

 ailing mother.     It is further contended that the learned Additional

Sessions Judge has accepted the position that he is not likely to flee

from justice or tamper with witnesses.



5.   Ms. Fizani Husain, learned APP for the State has contended that

apart from the instruments in question, the petitioner stands

implicated in 18 different cases relating to 18 cheques in the name of

different persons in Delhi and Rajasthan.



6.   These very submissions were placed before the learned court

which has considered the matter and has passed the order dated 21st

February, 2009 admitting the petitioner to bail conditional on making

the above deposit. The challenge in the present case is confined to

the imposition of the conditions of deposit of Rs.2,00,000/- with the

court and the further direction that it could release this amount to

either of the parties after completion of trial.


7.   The power to impose any condition while granting bail to any

person is to be found in 
Section 437
 of the Cr.P.C. which reads as

follows:-





        "437. When bail may be taken in case of non-

        bailable offence.



        1[(1) When any person accused of, or suspected of, the
        commission of any non-bailable offence is arrested or
        detained without warrant by an officer in charge of a
        police station or appears or is brought before a court
        other than the High Court or Court of Session, he may be
        released on bail, but-



              (i) Such person shall not be so released if there
              appear reasonable grounds for believing that he
              has been guilty of an offence punishable with death




                                 -3-

      or imprisonment for life;



     (ii) Such person shall not be so released if such
     offence is a cognizable offence and he had been
     previously convicted of an offence punishable with
     death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for
     seven years or more, or he had been previously
     convicted on two or more occasions of a non-

     bailable and cognizable offence:



Provided that the court may direct that a person referred
to in clause (i) or clause (ii) be released on bail if such
person is under the age of sixteen years or is a woman
or is sick or infirm:



Provided further that the court may also direct that a
person referred to in clause (ii) be released on bail if it is
satisfied that it is just and proper so to do for any other
special reason:



Provided also that the mere fact that an accused person
may be required for being identified by witnesses during
investigation shall not be sufficient ground for refusing to
grant bail if he is otherwise entitled to be released on
bail and gives an undertaking that the shall comply with
such directions as may be given by the court.]


(2) If it appears to such officer or court at any stage of
the investigation, inquiry or trial as the case may be,
that there are not reasonable grounds for believing that
the accused has committed a non-bailable offence, but
that there are sufficient grounds for further inquiry into
his guilt, 2[the accused shall, subject to the provisions of
section 446A and pending such inquiry, be released on
bail], or, at the discretion of such officer or court on the
execution by him of a bond without sureties for his
appearance as hereinafter provided.



(3) When a person accused or suspected of the
commission of an offence punishable with imprisonment
which may extend to seven years or more or of an
offence under Chapter VI, Chatter XVI or Chapter XVII of
the 
Indian Penal Code
 45 of 1860 or abetment of, or
conspiracy or attempt to commit, any such offence, is
released on bail under sub-section (1) the court may
impose any condition which the court considers
necessary-



                         -4-


              (a) In order to ensure that such person shall attend
             in accordance with the conditions of the bond
             executed        under      this     Chapter,      or


             (b) In order to ensure that such person shall not
             commit an offence similar to the offence of which
             he is accused or of the commission of which he is
             suspected, or


             (c) Otherwise in the interests of justice.



       (4) An officer or a court releasing any person on bail
       under sub-section (1), or sub- section (2), shall record in
       writing his or its 3[reasons or special reasons] for so
       doing.



       (5) Any court which has released a person on bail under
       sub-section (1), or sub- section (2), may, if it considers it
       necessary so to do, direct that such person be arrested
       and commit him to Custody.



       (6) If, any case triable by a Magistrate, the trial of a
       person accused of any non bailable offence is not
       Concluded within a period of sixty days from the first
       date fixed for - taking evidence in the case, such person
       shall, if he is in custody during the whole of the said
       period, be released on bail to the satisfaction of the
       Magistrate, unless for reasons to be recorded in writing,
       the Magistrate otherwise directs.



       (7) If, at any time after the conclusion of the trial of a
       person accused of a non bailable offence and before
       Judgment is delivered the Court is of opinion that there
       are reasonable grounds for believing that the accused is
       not guilty of any such offence, it shall release the
       accused, if he is in custody, on the execution by him of a
       bond without sureties for his appearance to hear
       judgment delivered."



8.   Sub-
Section 2
 of 
Section 438
 enumerates some conditions which

can be imposed while granting anticipatory bail and reads as follows:


     "438 (2) When the High Court or the Court of Session
     makes a direction under sub- section (1), it may include
     such conditions in such directions in the light of the facts of
     the particular case, as it may thinks fit, including -



                                -5-


            (i) A condition that the person shall make himself
           available for interrogation by a police officer and
           when required;



           (ii) A condition that the person shall not, directly or
           indirectly,- make any inducement, threat or promise
           to any person acquainted with the facts of the case
           so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to
           the court or to any police officer,


           (iii) A condition that the person shall not leave India
           without the previous permission of the court;



           (iv) Such other condition as may be imposed under
           sub-section (3) of 
section 437
, as if the bail were
           granted -under that section."



9.   This court had occasion to consider the expression "such other

conditions as the court considers necessary in the interest of justice"


in a judicial pronouncement reported at 2002 (3) JCC 1721

Jagmohan Singh Kataria & Anr. Vs. State of NCT of Delhi has

been placed.   Construing the statutory provisions, it was held that

such conditions have to be read ejusdem generis to the conditions

which are enumerated in sub-
section 3
 of 
Section 437
 or sub-
section

2
 of 
Section 438
 of the Cr.P.C.     The judicial principle which was laid

down by the court is that a criminal prosecution and threat of

incarceration cannot be utilised as a tool for recovery of money from a

person who is implicated in the case. In this behalf, the observation of

this court in this precedent can be usefully adverted to and read as

follows:



      "5. A careful consideration of the provisions of 
Sections
      437(3)
 and 
438(2)
 Criminal Procedure Code shows that
      conditions which can be imposed are primarily with a view





                                  -6-

        to ensure availability of the accused during investigation,
      enquiry or trial and his non-interference with the course of
      justice. Other conditions which Court may think fit can
      also be imposed but idea should be to ensure his
      presence as and when required and his non-interference
      with the investigation, enquiry or trial. It is obvious that
      other conditions should be "ejusdem generis" to the
      conditions which are already enumerated under 
Sections
      437(3)
 or 438 (2) 
Criminal Procedure Code
 proceedings
      for bail are not the forum for settlement of claims or
      recovery of outstanding dues.            At the stage of
      consideration of bail, parties raise claims or counter-
      claims which are yet to be decided on merits. Therefore,
      there is every possibility of the Court falling into a serious
      error by imposing conditions requiring deposit of money
      or return of any specific property which issues are to be
      decided on merits in appropriate proceedings. That's why
      superior courts have often frowned upon the practice of
      imposing such condition while granting anticipatory bail or
      regular bail. In the caseof Sajani Khanna & Anr. Versus
      State 2002 (1) JCC 465, learned Additional Sessions Judge
      had imposed the condition of depositing a sum of Rs.15
      lacs in the form of FDR in the name of the trial court as
      security while granting anticipatory bail for the offence
      under 
Section 406
/
420
 IPC. Supreme Court observed that
      imposition of such condition was unreasonable. In the
      case of Sandeep Jain Vs. National Capital Territory of Delhi
      Rep. by Secretary, Home Deptt. 2002 (2) JCC (SC) 639
      while granting bail to the accused appellant for th e
      offence under 
Sections 420
 and 
406
 IPC, learned
      Metropolitan Magistrate imposed some conditions. In
      compliance to these conditions, one of the sureties issued
      three cheques for Rs.2 lacs each to the complainant. On
      presentation these cheques were dishonoured. Wife of
      the complainant moved Court for cancellation of the bail
      whereupon bail was cancelled. Appellant was sent to
      prison. The Apex Court observed that such unreasonable
      conditions should not be imposed while granting
      bail/anticipatory bail.

            In view of the above, impugned order whereby the
      petitioners were required to submit a FDR of Rs.5 lacs as a
      pre-condition of bail is hereby set aside."



10.   This very issue also arose for consideration before the Division

Bench     of   this    court    in    the    judgment      reported    at

MANU/DE/0094/2008=147 (2008) DLT 1=2008 (229) ELT 350



                                -7-

 (Del) Raj Kumar Aggarwal Vs. Director General, Central Excise

& Anr. The Division Bench placed reliance on the principles laid down

by the Apex Court in (2001) 13 SCC 457 Sheikh Ayub Vs. State of

M.P. and (2006) 9 SCC 169 Shyam Singh Vs. State and prior

judgments of this and laid down the legal position as follows:-


     "17. Considerable arguments had been generated on the
     question of imposition of conditions by the learned Single
     Judge. Our attention has been drawn to the use of these
     words inter alias under 
Section 437(3)
 and 
438(1)(b)(2)
 of
     the Cr.PC. We see no reason to make a distinction between
     the word conditions of bail or terms of bail either in the
     context of 
Section 167(2)
 or Chapter-XXXIII. They have
     been employed as synonymous of each other. 
In
     
Sreenivasulu Reddy v. State of Tamil Nadu
 7 (2000) CCR 96
     the accused had already deposited a sum of Rupees 35
     crore out of the Rupees 50 crore imposed in the Bail Order.
     Their Lordships had emphasised that while exercising
     jurisdiction under 
Section 438(2)
 of the Cr.PC, the Court
     ought only to impose such conditions/terms for enlarging
     an accused on bail as would ensure that the accused does
     not abscond. These conditions should not be intended or
     calculated to carry out and effect recoveries from the
     accused.
 
In 
Sandeep Jain v. State of Delhi
 1 (2000) SLT 368
     a direction to deposit Rs. 2 lacs apart from furnishing of a
     bond of Rs. 50,000 with two solvent sureties was held to be
     unreasonable.
 In Sheikh Ayub v. State of M.P. (2004) 13
     SCC 457 the Supreme Court deleted the direction to
     deposit a sum of Rs. 2,50,000/- , which was the amount
     allegedly misappropriated by the accused. 
Similarly, in
     
Shyam Singh v. State
 (2006) 9 SCC 169 the condition that
     the accused should make a payment of Rs. 1,00,000/- per
     month after his release on bail was found by the Apex
     Court not to be justified. Their Lordships observed that
     while it is of course open to a Court to grant or refuse bail it
     was impermissible for it to assume that an offence has
     been committed even at the stage of grant of bail and to
     direct repayment of any amount is both onerous and
     unwarranted. The condition of depositing a sum of Rs.
     1,00,000/- was struck down.
 
In 
Amarjit Singh v. State (NCT
     of Delhi
) 2002(61) DRJ 67, after adverting to Sandeep Jain,
     the Supreme Court had recorded that we have no
     hesitation in coming to the conclusion that the imposition
     of condition to deposit the sum of Rs. 15,00,000/- in the
     form of an FDR in the Trial Court is an unreasonable



                                -8-

       condition and, thereforee, we set aside the condition as a
      condition precedent for granting anticipatory bail.
 
A
      Division Bench of this Court in 
M.R. Narayanan v. State

      103(2003) DLT 434, applying the ratio in Sreenivasulu
      Reddy also concluded that conditions akin to deposit of
      money ought not to be imposed as a ground for grant of
      bail; that conditions/terms are imposed solely to ensure the
      presence of the accused at the time of trial. The only
      situation where money may be deposited in fact arises
      from the volition of the accused. This is where the required
      person by any Court to execute a bond instead elects,
      under 
Section 145
 of the Cr. PC, to seek permission from
      the Court to deposit a sum of money or Government
      promissory notes in lieu of executing a bond. This is so
      because a mere deposit of money may in some cases
      prove to defeat the purpose behind sureties being made
      available since the source of the monetary deposit is
      untraceable and an accused can abscond if he finds the
      deposit to be trivially incommensurate to his freedom."


                                   (underlined supplied)


11.   It is trite that the considerations which are required to weigh with

the court while considering the application seeking grant of bail are

extremely well settled.   Several judicial precedents are to be found

specially in the context of economic offences wherein a comparison is

drawn which relates to the financial amount involved in the offence.

However, the imposition of a pre-deposit of an amount as a condition

for grant of bail has been repeatedly deprecated. It has been held

that imposition of such condition is not exercise of sound judicial

discretion. (Ref. 2000 Crl.L.J. 464 Avinash Arora & Anr. Vs. State

of UT of Chandigarh & Anr.)


12.   The courts have held that a condition which is imposed on a

person who stands incarcerated as a condition for bail would only

aggravate his situation and result in non-availability of the benefit of

the order of bail/anticipatory bail.    The Apex Court has held that




                                -9-

 imposition of such a condition is unreasonable and in a given case,

may be both onerous and unwarranted.



13.   It would appear that the situation where money may be

deposited may arise from the volition of the accused as for instance, a

person elects under 
Section 145
 of the Cr.P.C. to deposit money in lieu

of executing a bond. However, the court has cautioned that in some

cases, mere deposit of the money may be a device to defeat the

purpose behind the requirement of sureties being made available to

ensure the appearance of an accused person.                The source of the

monetary deposit is not available to the court and would be

untraceable.      If the accused finds the deposit to be trivially

incommensurate to his freedom, he would abscond. A solemn duty is

thus cast on the court to take adequate care to ensure exercise of the

discretion   on   the   binding   legal    principles    laid   in   the   above

pronouncements so as to ensure the appearance of the accused

person while setting him at liberty.



14.   The petitioner remains in jail despite the order passed on 21st of

February, 2009 admitting him to bail because of his inability to comply

with the condition of deposit on account of pecuniary and financial

hardship. The order does not reflect any connection between the

condition    which   has   been    imposed     and      necessity    to    ensure

appearance of the applicant. In the light of the binding legal principles

laid down in the judicial pronouncements noted hereinabove, it has to

be held that the court had no jurisdiction to impose such a condition

which was imposed while granting bail to the petitioner.



                                  - 10 -

 15.   Accordingly, it is directed that the order dated 21st February,

2009, to the extent that it imposes the condition for deposit of the

amount of Rs.2,00,000/- by the petitioner, shall stand hereby set aside

and quashed.



16.   It is further directed that as a result the applicant shall be

released on bail subject to his furnishing a personal bond in the sum of

Rs.25,000/- with two sureties of the like amount to the satisfaction of

the metropolitan magistrate/duty/link magistrate as directed by the

order dated 21st of February, 2009.



      This petition is allowed in the above terms.



      Dasti.





September 17, 2009                          Gita Mittal, J.
aa




                                - 11 -