



[Cites 
13
, Cited by 
0
]




Madras High Court


R.Pandiayarajan vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 26 July, 2018


Author: 
R.Suresh Kumar


Bench: 
R.Suresh Kumar


                                                             1

                                BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT

                                                   DATED: 26.07.2018

                                                          CORAM:

                                   THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE R.SURESH KUMAR

                                   W.P.(MD)Nos.16455 to 16461 and 16433 of 2018


                      W.P.(MD)No.16455 of 2018:-

                      R.Pandiayarajan                                     ...Petitioner

                                                            -Vs-

                      1.The State of Tamil Nadu,
                        Represented by Principal Secretary to Government,
                        School Education Department,
                        Fort St.George, Chennai-600 009.

                      2.The Director of School Education,
                        DPI Complex, College Road,
                        Chennai-600 006.

                      3.The Joint Director of School Education (Vocational),
                        O/o. the Director of School Education,
                        DPI Complex, College Road,
                        Chennai-600 006.

                      4.The Chief Educational Officer,
                        O/o. Chief Educational Officer,
                        Theni District, Theni.

                      5.The Accountant General,
                        O/o the Accountant General (A & E),
                        Teynampet, Chennai- 600 018.                      ..Respondents
                      PRAYER: Writ Petition is filed under 
Article 226
 of the Constitution of India



http://www.judis.nic.in
                                                            2

                      praying for the issuance of a Writ of       Mandamus, to calculate the 50%
                      of service rendered by the petitioner as Part-time Vocational Instructor
                      drawing consolidated pay along with regular service for arriving net
                      qualifying service for calculation pension and to grant all monetary and
                      other attendant benefits and arrears within a stipulated time may be fixed
                      by this Court.
                                For Petitioner         : Mr.M.Saravanakumar
                                For Respondents        : Mr.K.Saravanan (for R1 to R4)
                                                                Government Advocate
                                                         Mr.P.Gunaseelan Muthiah (for R5)

                                                    COMMON ORDER


                                In all these batch of cases, the respective petitioners are either

                      working as Teachers, ie., Vocational Instructors or have retired from service

                      in that capacity.



                                2. In W.P.(MD) Nos.16455, 16456 and 16458 of 2018               the

                      petitioners are still working as Vocational Instructors.    In W.P.(MD) Nos.



                      16457, 16459 to 16461 and 16433 of 2018, the respective petitioners have

                      retired from service.



                                3. Since their services have been brought to time scale of pay

                      after some years only from that date, their services have been calculated




http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            3


                      for the purpose of pensionary benefits. Their grievance appears to be in

                      spite of the amendment having been brought under Rule 11(4) of the Tamil

                      Nadu Pension Rules, the past services rendered by them, as either single

                      time or part time Vocational Instructors had not been taken into account for

                      the purpose of pensionary benefits.



 
4. The learned counsel for the petitioners would submit that the

                      issue raised in these batch of cases have already been decided by a number

                      of decisions of this Court and in this regard, the learned counsel for the

                      petitioners have also relied upon a recent judgment of Mine dated

                      09.07.2018 in W.P.(MD) No.14365/2014 etc batch, in the matter of

                      
A.Ramalingam v. State of Tamil Nadu
 and three others.




                                5. I have heard the learned counsel for the respective petitioners

                      and also the learned Special Government Pleader, Government Advocate for

                      the official respondents and learned standing counsel for the Accountant

                      General and I have also gone through the materials placed before this

                      Court.



 
6. As has been rightly pointed out by the learned counsel for the

                      parties, the issue raised in these batch of cases is no more res integra, as



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                           4


                      these issues have already been considered and decided by this Court. After

                      having considered all those aspects, I have passed the order in the

                      aforementioned judgment in 
A.Ramalingam
's case on 09.07.2018.




                                7. For the sake of better understanding and clarity, the relevant

                      portion of my order is extracted hereunder:



                                      “11.I have heard the said submissions
                            made by the learned counsel for the parties.



                                      12.As has been rightly submitted by the
                            learned counsel for the petitioners, the issue raised
                            in this batch of writ petitions has already been
                            decided in number of cases by this Court.          
In this
                            regard, one of the earliest decision of the learned
                            Judge of this Court was made in W.P.(MD)No.16771
                            of 2013 in the matter of 
V.Ragavan Vs. State of
                            Tamil    Nadu
     represented      by   its   Secretary,
                            School Education Department and others.                 In
                            
the said decision
, the learned Judge has dealt with
                            the similar issue and has given his verdict after
                            exhaustively discussed the various grounds raised
                            by both sides.        In this regard, the following
                            paragraph of 
the said decision
 can be usefully
                            referred to:-


                                             “3.The petitioner was appointed
                                  as a single part time Vocational teacher on


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                    5


                          08.10.1980 and he was regularised on
                          01.04.1990 in such capacity.         Thereafter,
                          he      was   promoted        as   P.G.Assistant
                          (Commerce) and retired from service on
                          30.03.2013       on   attaining    the   age    of
                          superannuation. The Government as well
                          as the private schools were engaging
                          number of qualified persons as Teachers
                          for the Vocational subjects either as Double
                          part time or Single part time Teachers
                          according to their needs. All of them were
                          employed indefinitely for years together.
                          After     repeated       representations       and
                          agitations, the Government, in order to
                          bring them under time scale of pay in a
                          phased manner, directed to fill up 800
                          posts for the Vocational Instructors in
                          G.O.Ms.No.712         Education      Department
                          dated 28.05.1990 by appointing them as
                          Double    part    time   Teachers.       Further,
                          G.O.No.68 dated 20.03.2007 was passed
                          stating that the Vocational Teachers can
                          been appointed on par with B.T.Assistants.
                          After the retirement of the petitioner, the
                          service rendered by him as part time
                          Vocational Teacher from 08.10.1980 to
                          31.03.1990 was not taken into account
                          while calculating the pension.             Under



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                         6


                               similar     circumstances,     this    Court        in
                               W.P.No.39177 of 2002 dated 16.04.2009
                               directed the respondents to count 50% of
                               the part time service rendered by the
                               petitioner    therein    for   the    purpose       of
                               calculating the pension. A writ appeal filed
                               challenging the said order, in W.A.No.1702
                               of 2010 was dismissed on 20.09.2010.
                               Further      appeal     preferred     before       the
                               Hon'ble Supreme Court also came to be
                               dismissed.     Therefore,      the petitioner is
                               also entitled to similar relief.”

                                   13.The learned Judge, after having taken
                          into account the earlier decision rendered in this
                          regard, which had been taken on appeal by way of
                          intra Court appeal, wherein also, the view of the
                          learned Single Judge was confirmed and the same
                          was also taken to the Hon'ble Apex Court by filing
                          SLP, the Hon'ble Apex Court also dismissed the said
                          SLP, confirming the view taken by the High Court,
                          has allowed the said writ petition.

 
14.When I had an occasion to consider the
                          similar issue in W.P.(MD)Nos.256 and 257of 2015 in
                          the case of 
P.Natarajan and another Vs. the State of
                          Tamil Nadu
 represented by its Secretary, School
                          Education      Department     and    others,        I     have
                          considered 
the said decision
 of the learned Judge
                          
referred to above
, in the teeth of the amended Rule




http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                         7


                          11(4) of the Rules, 1978, which reads thus:-


                                          “In the said Rules in Rule 11,
                               after sub-rule (3), the following sub-rule
                               shall be added namely:-

                                          “(4)Half of the service rendered
                               under   the       State   Government        in   non-
                               provincialised service, consolidated pay,
                               honorarium or daily wages basis on or after
                               1st January 1961 in respect of Government
                               employees absorbed in regular service
                               before 1st April 2003 shall be counted for
                               retirement benefits, along with regular
                               service, subject to the following conditions,
                               namely:-

                                          (i)Service      rendered        in    non-

                               provincialised service, consolidated pay,
                               honorarium or daily wages basis shall be in
                               a job involving whole time employment;

                                          (ii)Service rendered shall be on
                               consolidated       pay,   honorarium       or    daily
                               wages      paid     on    monthly        basis    and

                               subsequently absorbed in regular service
                               under the State Government.

                                          (iii)Service       rendered     in    non-

                               provincialised service, consolidated pay,
                               honorarium or daily wages basis shall be
                               followed by absorption in regular service
                               before 1st April 2003 without a break:



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                       8


                                         Provided   that this   sub-rule is
                               applicable to all employees who rendered
                               service under the State Government in
                               non-provincilised service, consolidated pay,
                               honorarium or daily wages basis on or after
                               1st January 1961 and absorbed in regular
                               service before 1st April 2003:

                                         Provided further that wherever
                               there was break in service before their
                               absorption in regular service before 1st
                               April 2003, the same shall be specifically
                               condoned by the orders of the Head of
                               Departments, in which the employees were
                               regularly absorbed and such period of
                               break shall not count for the purpose of
                               pensionary benefits.”

 
15.In 
the said judgment
 in W.P.(MD)Nos.
                          256 and 257 of 2015 cited supra, after having
                          considered the submissions made on behalf of the
                          Government that, the cases decided in favour of the
                          employees and also the order complied with by the
                          respondents cannot be taken as precedent, I passed
                          the following order:-


 
“12.The learned Judge in 
the said
                               decision
 dated 09.04.2014, made in W.P.
                               (MD) Nos.16771 to 16775 of 2013 etc.,
                               batch has in fact discussed this issue
                               exhaustively and has given a detailed



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                   9


                          interpretation as to how the very word
                          'whole time employment' as employed in
                          Rule 11(4) of the Tamil Nadu Pension Rules
                          has to be interpreted. The learned Judge
                          has given a complete answer to the
                          objections     raised   by   the      respondents
                          herein in paragraphs 26 to 29 of 
the said
                          judgment
,      which    have        already    been
                          extracted herein above. The learned Judge
                          has also made a reference that Rule 11(4)
                          of the Tamil Nadu Pension Rules itself was
                          impliedly overruled by the Division Bench
                          of this Court in W.A.No.1702 of 2010 dated
                          20.09.2010.


 
14.Yet another factor in the said
                          batch of cases cited supra is that, all those
                          petitioners    were     worked       as    part-time
                          Vocational Instructors. For the said part-
                          time Vocational Instructors, though the
                          timing was restricted either to have 2.00
                          p.m. to 5.00 p.m. or 10.00 a.m. to 1.00
                          p.m. or like that cannot be construed that
                          those people had worked only in that time
                          and for the remaining time, they left the
                          institution.     This    issue        has      been
                          exhaustively    discussed      by    the    learned
                          Judge in 
the said decision
 (cited supra).
                          The word 'whole time employment' was



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                               10


                          also to be considered in a particular
                          manner, has also been discussed and
                          decided by the learned Judge in 
the said
                          decision
. In this regard it was specifically
                          held that even though the job is only for a
                          few hours the teacher had to wait in the
                          school and present for the whole day
                          signing attendance for both sessions. This
                          factor has been specifically discussed and
                          decided by the learned Judge.


 
15.Across the Bar, it was also
                          informed that 
the said judgment
 was also
                          implemented. It is also informed across the
                          bar that as against some similar decisions
                          made by this Court, the State had gone
                          upto Supreme Court and the S.L.P. filed by
                          the State Government has been dismissed.
                          Though specific reference was not given by
                          the petitioners side, the said submissions
                          made by them are not disputed from the
                          respondents side.


                                   16.Moreover, in one such case,
                          this Court in W.P.No.4556 of 2007 by order
                          dated 29.07.2011, a direction was given to
                          the respondents that 50% of the past
                          service should be taken into account for
                          the pensionary benefits. The said order of
                          this Court dated 29.07.2011 has been



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                    11


                          implemented by the Government through
                          G.O.(4D)        No.19      School         Education
                          Department dated 04.11.2014.

                                     17.The defence now taken by the
                          learned Government Advocate that this
                          kind of isolated cases cannot be accepted.
                          When similarly placed persons are not
                          treated equally, that also would amount
                          discrimination. Therefore, the provisions
                          of 
Article 14
 of the Constitution of India
                          can very well be invoked in this case.
                          Therefore, such kind of discrimination that
                          too from the State Government cannot be
                          accepted and permitted.

                                     18.It is an admitted fact that
                          these two petitioners were working as
                          part-time Vocational Instructors for longer
                          years. Only after several years they were
                          brought      under        full-time       Vocational
                          Instructors by regularising their services.
                          Though both the petitioners are getting
                          pensions, since their past 50% service has
                          not been taken into account they are
                          getting     a     very         meagre       pension.

                          Considering      these     aspects,       legislators
                          themselves       though        it   fit   to   make
                          amendment in the Rule. That is why

                          amendment in Rule 11(4) came into the



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                      12


                          statutory     book.    The        normal        rule     of
                          interpretation of statutory Rule is to be
                          given   effect      when     specific         Rule     was
                          brought in by way of beneficial rule. Rule
                          11(4) of the Tamil Nadu Pension Rules has
                          been brought in by way of beneficial rule
                          for the benefit of those who have rendered
                          unblemished service for several years and
                          going   without       getting          any    pensionary
                          benefits. Therefore, the said Rule cannot
                          be subjected to a different interpretation
                          as has been sought for by the respondents
                          side. Therefore, this Court is of the view
                          that Rule 11(4) of the Tamil Nadu Pension
                          Rules certainly would give leverage to the
                          petitioners i.e., 50% of their past service,
                          when they were working as part-time
                          Vocational Instructors, shall be taken into
                          account for the purpose of pensionary
                          benefits.

                                      19.For    all        the     reasons       and
                          discussions made above, this Court is of
                          the firm view that the petitioners succeed
                          in these Writ Petitions and they are entitled
                          to the mandamus as sought for in these
                          Writ Petitions.

                                      20.In    the     result,         these     Writ
                          Petitions are allowed and the respondents



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                       13


                               are directed to take into consideration 50%
                               of the past services of the petitioners when
                               they were working as part-time Vocational
                               Instructors. Based on such service, the
                               pensionary benefits of the petitioner shall
                               be    recalculated   and     the   recalculated
                               pension shall be continued to be paid to
                               the petitioners. It is needless to state that
                               when the pension is recalculated from their
                               date of retirement till payment, arrears
                               shall also be paid to them. The aforesaid
                               exercise shall be completed within a period
                               of three months from the date of receipt of
                               a copy of this order.

                                         21.With these directions, these
                               two Writ Petitions are allowed. No costs.”

                                    16.In the recent judgment of the Hon'ble
                          Division Bench of this Court in W.A.No.882 of 2017
                          etc., batch,   in the case of The Government of
                          Tamil Nadu, represented by its Secretary to
                          Government,- School Education Department
                          and others Vs. K.Pachaiyappan and others, the
                          Division Bench, after having gone through the issue
                          once again, has passed the following order:-

                                     “15.In terms of the above discussions,
                               we dispose of the writ appeals as under:-

                                         (i)50% of the services rendered
                               by the respondents herein, as Part Time



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                          14


                               Vocational Instructorss (either as Single
                               Part Time or Double Part Time Vocational
                               Instructors), shall be counted for the
                               purpose of computing pension and other
                               retiral benefits.

                                          (ii)The above said benefit shall be
                               extended only to the respondents in these
                               writ appeals and for the persons similarly
                               situated   like     that   of    the   respondents
                               herein, whose cases are pending before
                               this Court. Thus it is made clear that the
                               above said benefit shall not be extended to
                               any other future cases that may be filed on
                               this account, on the ground of delay and
                               laches, since all along they have not come
                               up before this Court and remained as
                               fence-sitters.    It is also needless to point
                               out that allowing such cases would amount
                               to opening the pandora's box, touching
                               upon the financial implications of the
                               State.”

                                    17.The      learned        Special         Government
                          Pleader    heavily     relied        upon      the     aforesaid
                          observation made by the Division Bench of this
                          Court that, the benefit extended in the said batch of
                          cases shall be applicable only to those parties and
                          the similar benefit shall not be extended to any other
                          future case that may be filed before this Court, on




http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                        15


                          the ground of delay and latches.         Since the said
                          observation of the Division Bench has been heavily
                          relied upon by the learned Special Government
                          Pleader, this Court wants to deal with this issue also.

                                     18.First of all, number of cases in this
                          batch, have already been filed, prior to the said
                          decision    rendered     by   the   Division    Bench   on
                          06.04.2018 and were pending before this Court.

                                     19.Further, it is a settled proposition of law
                          that, in service matters, if the similarly placed
                          persons, who are entitled to get the benefit under
                          law, having been denied the benefit, even though in
                          this regard already a decision has been rendered by
                          the Court of law and the same is implemented, the
                          very same relief shall also be extended to all
                          similarly placed persons irrespective of the fact,
                          whether they approached the Court or not, if the law
                          declared by the Court is judgement in rem.

                                     20.Insofar as the declaration made by this
                          Court in number of decisions, as has been referred
                          to above, which were confirmed by the Division
                          Bench of this Court and subsequently, by the Hon'ble
                          Apex Court and also with regard to the entitlement
                          of pensionary benefits of the Teachers / employees,
                          who   had     rendered    continuous     /     unblemished
                          services for several years, either as part time or full
                          time or temporary or adhoc basis, by taking note of
                          the 50% of the said services they rendered, prior to




http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                       16


                          they brought in under regular time scale of pay or
                          absorption, such entitlement was declared by the
                          Court of law, which shall be the judgment in rem. If
                          the law is declared by the Courts and similar
                          pensionary benefits, having been declared by the
                          Court of law and having been conferred to several
                          such   similarly   placed    persons   by    employer    /
                          Government, then, certainly this Court can extend
                          those benefits for similarly placed, who seek such
                          remedy by approaching this Court.

                                   21.Moreover, the cause of action arose in
                          these kind of cases are continuous cause of action as
                          each of the petitioners, who are the erstwhile
                          employees of the respective employer / State, would
                          be entitled to get the pensionary benefits till their
                          life time.   Thereafter, the legal heirs would be
                          entitled to get the family pension benefits.

                                   22.Therefore,      the   benefits   accrued    on
                          them, which have been claimed before this Court, by
                          way of this litigations, are continuous in nature.
                          Therefore, once the continuous cause of action is
                          available for litigant, he / she can approach the
                          Court of law at any point of time.

                                   23. If the judgment is in rem, the benefit of
                          the judgment to other similarly placed or situated
                          persons can be extended and in this regard, the plea
                          of delay/laches or expiry of limitation can be
                          condoned.



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                      17


 
24. Emphasizing the said principle, the
                          Hon'ble Apex Court in 1997 (6) SCC 721 in the
                          matter of 
K.C.Sharma and others v. Union of
                          India and others
 held as follows:


                                         “3. This appeal is directed against
                               the judgment of the Principal Bench of the
                               Central Administrative Tribunal (hereinafter
                               referred to as 'the Tribunal') dated July 25,
                               1994 in O.A. No. 774 of 1994. The appellants
                               were employed as guards in the Northern
                               Railway and they retired as guards during the
                               period between 1980 and 1988. They felt
                               aggrieved by the notifications dated December
                               5, 1988 whereby Rule 2544 of the Indian
                               Railways Establishment Code was amended
                               and for the purpose of calculation of average
                               emoluments the maximum limit in respect of
                               Running Allowances was reduced from 75% to
                               45% in respect of period from January 1, 1973
                               to March 31, 1979 and to 55% for the period
                               from April 1, 1979 onwards.

                                         4. The validity of the retrospective
                               amendments     introduced   by   the   impugned
                               notifications dated December 5, 1988 had been
                               considered by the Full Bench of the Tribunal in
                               its judgment dated December 16, 1993 in O.A.
                               No. 395-403 of 1993 and connected matters
                               and the said notifications in so far as they gave
                               retrospective effect to the amendments were
                               held to be invalid as being violative a Articles




http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                     18


                          14 and 16 of the Constitution. Since the
                          appellants were adversely affected by the
                          impugned     amendments,          they   sought    the
                          benefit of the Full Bench of the Tribunal by
                          filing   representations        before   the   Railway
                          Administration. Since they failed to obtain
                          redress, they filed the application (O.A. NO.
                          774 of 1994) seeking relief before the Tribunal
                          in April 1994. The said application of the
                          appellants was dismissed by the Tribunal by
                          the impugned judgment on the view that the
                          application was barred by limitation. The
                          Tribunal refused to condone the delay in the
                          filing of the said applications.

 
5. The correctness of the decision of
                          the Full Bench of the Tribunal has been
                          affirmed by this Court in 
Chairman, Railway
                          Board & Ors. V. C.R. Rangadhamaiah & Ors.,
                          Civil Appeals Nos
. 4174-4182 of 1995 and
                          connected matters decided today.


                                     6. Having regarding to the facts and
                          circumstances of the case, we are of the view
                          that this was a fit case in which the Tribunal
                          should have condoned the delay in the filing of
                          the application and the appellants should have
                          been given relief in the same terms as was
                          granted by the Full Bench of the Tribunal. The
                          appeal is, therefore, allowed, the impugned
                          judgment of the Tribunal is set aside, the delay
                          in filing of O.A. No. 774 of 199 is condoned and
                          the said application is allowed. The appellants



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                           19


                               would be entitled to the same relief in matter
                               of pension as has been granted by the Full
                               Bench of the Tribunal in its judgment dated
                               December 16, 1993 in O.A. Nos. 395-403 of
                               1993 and connected matters. No order as to
                               costs.”

 
25. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in (2006)
                          2 SCC 747 in the matter of 
State of Karnataka
                          and others v. C.Lalitha
, has made the following
                          observations:


                                            “29.Service jurisprudence evolved by
                               this Court from time to time postulates that all
                               persons similarly situated should be treated
                               similarly.     Only    because       one   person   has
                               approached the court that would not mean that
                               persons similarly situated should be treated
                               differently.

                                   26. Insofar as the principle that, seeking
                          redressal against the denial of service benefits, for
                          which, the employee is entitled to, and if it is the
                          continuing     cause       of   action,     the   question     of
                          limitation/delay does not arise in those cases, where
                          the employee seek for such benefit, which has
                          already been given to similarly placed persons,
                          Courts have taken the view in favour of the
                          employees.

 
27. To emphasize the said principle, the
                          Hon'ble Supreme Court in (2010) 12 SCC 538 in
                          the matter of State of Madhya Pradesh and



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                        20


others v. Yogendra Srivatsava
 has held as follows:


                                         “16. The Tribunal directed payment
                               of the difference in NPA to respondents from
                               their respective dates of appointment. The
                               respondents     were     appointed    from   1982
                               onwards. The respondents had approached the
                               Tribunal long after their appointment, that is,
                               in 1998 or thereafter.

                                         17. The appellants contended that
                               the claims were therefore barred by limitation.

                               It was pointed out that the respondents were
                               paid NPA at a fixed rate as stipulated in the
                               appointment orders and NPA was increased
                               only when it was revised by Government orders
                               from time to time; that respondents accepted
                               such NPA without protest; and that therefore,
                               they cannot, after periods varying from 5 to 15
                               years, challenge the fixation of NPA or contend
                               that they are entitled to NPA at a higher rate,
                               that is 25% of their pay.

                                         18.We cannot agree. Where the issue
                               relates to payment or fixation of salary or any
                               allowance, the challenge is not barred by
                               limitation or the doctrine of laches, as the
                               denial of benefit occurs every month when the
                               salary is paid, thereby giving rise to a fresh
                               cause of action, based on continuing wrong.

 
Though    the   lesser      payment   may    be   a
                               consequence of the error that was committed
                               at the time of appointment, the claim for a
                               higher allowance in accordance with the Rules



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                      21


                               (prospectively from the date of application)
                               cannot be rejected merely because it arises
                               from a wrong fixation made several years prior
                               to the claim for correct payment. But in
                               respect of grant of consequential relief of
                               recovery of arrears for the past period, the
                               principle relating to recurring and successive
                               wrongs     would     apply.   Therefore     the
                               consequential relief of payment of arrears will
                               have to be restricted to a period of three years
                               prior to the date of the original application.
                               [See: 
M.R. Gupta vs. Union of India
 - 
1995 (5)
                               SCC 628, and Union of India vs. Tarsem
                               Singh
 2008.”


 
28. More than one Division Bench of this
                          Court considered the issue raised in these batch of
                          cases, as to whether the single or double part time
                          Vocational Instructors were entitled to seek the
                          benefit of reckoning the 50% of the past services
                          rendered by them till they brought under time scale
                          of pay and absorption, in view of Rule 11, especially,
                          Rule 11(4) of the Tamil Nadu Pension Rules, 1978.
                          Having considered and decided in favour of the
                          employees and against those decisions, though State
                          preferred Special Leave Petitions, the Hon'ble Apex
                          Court by dismissing the said S.L.Ps. affirmed the
                          decisions of this Court and following which
, 
the said
                          decision
 rendered by the Writ Court as affirmed by
                          the Division Bench of this Court as well as the




http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                     22


                          Hon'ble Apex Court has been implemented. When
                          that being so, whether diagonally opposite view can
                          be taken by a subsequent decision to deny such
                          benefits to those, who had not immediately come
                          and approached this Court subsequently and in this
                          regard, whether a cut off date can be fixed to
                          prevent the aggrieved persons/employees/litigant to
                          approach the Court, can no longer be an issue
                          without any resolvement.




                                  29. 
In this regard, the Hon'ble Apex Court
                          has given a strong observation in 2015 (8) SCC
                          129 in 
P.Suseela and others v. University Grants
                          Commission and others
, where the Hon'ble Apex
                          Court has made the following observations:


                                         “25.In SLPs (C) Nos.3054-55 of 2014,
                               a judgment of the same High Court dated
                               06.01.2014 again by a Division Bench arrived
                               at the opposite conclusion.    This is also a
                               matter which causes us some distress.       A
                               Division Bench judgment of the same High
                               court is binding on a subsequent Division
                               Bench.   The subsequent Division bench can
                               either follow it or refer such judgment to the
                               Chief Justice to constitute a Full Bench if it
                               differs with it.   We do not appreciate the
                               manner in which this subsequent judgment
                               (even though it has reached the right result),
                               has dealt with an earlier binding Division




http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                       23


                               Bench judgment of the same High Court.”

                                   30. That apart, it has been brought to the
                          notice of this Court by the learned members of the
                          Bar, who supported the case of the petitioners
                          herein that, at least in two Division Benches of this
                          Court, in recent decisions, the view taken by this
                          Court in a number of decisions on the issue, raised
                          in this batch of cases, have been reaffirmed and
                          amplified.

                                   31. The first decision is by a Division Bench
                          of this Court made in W.A.No.51 of 2018 etc
                          batch   dated     27.03.2018      in   the     matter     of
                          Government of Tamil Nadu represented by its
                          Principal Secretary to Government, Forest and
                          Environment       Department        and      others       v.
                          K.Sakthivel and others.

                                   32. In the said Division Bench judgment,
                          the issue of calculating the 50% of past services
                          rendered by temporary employees (in that case, it
                          was Plot Watcher), was considered in detail, where
                          the earlier judgments of this Court had been taken
                          note of and ultimately, the Division Bench concluded
                          that the said benefits conferred to the private
                          respondents, who were the petitioners before the
                          Writ Court were affirmed/confirmed.

                                   33.   The    Division    Bench   in    the     said
                          judgment has made the following decision:

                                          “24.The validity of fixing such a cut-


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                       24


                          off    date     was    the        subject     matter     of
                          consideration in the case of 
P.Chinniyan v. State
                          of    Tamil     Nadu
 rep.     by    its     Secretary    to
                          Government, Forest and Environment (FR-2)
                          Department, Chennai ? 600 009 and Others
                          reported in (2014)6 MLJ 316 and the Court
                          held that the prescription of cut-off date as
                          01.04.2003 for absorption into regular service
                          under Rule 11(4) to count half of the service
                          rendered prior to absorption has no rational
                          basis and the same is arbitrary and violative
                          of 
Article 14
 of the Constitution of India.


                                        25.It was further held that Rule 11(4)
                          is totally redundant in view of Rule 11(2),
                          which does not prescribe any cut-off date as to
                          absorption into regular service. Therefore, it
                          was held that the benefits given under Rule
                          11(2) cannot be deprived and taken away by
                          Rule    11(4)    and   thus       the   cut-off   date   of
                          absorption as 01.04.2003 prescribed in Rule
                          11(4) should be ignored, otherwise it will lead
                          to grave injustice. The Court took note of the
                          facts of the said case, where the petitioner
                          therein was working on daily wages from 1967
                          till 2003 and when he was absorbed as a Mali,
                          he has served for more than 36 years before
                          his absorption in regular service. The said
                          decision in the case of B.Chinnaiyan was
                          followed in the cases of W.P.Nos.21355 and
                          21356 of 2017, dated 08.09.2017. In 
the said
                          decision
, reference was made to the decision of



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                       25


                          the Hon'ble Division Bench in the case of Union
                          of India v. K.Punniyakottai reported in 2014 (2)
                          CTC 777, where more or less an identical case
                          was    considered       arising        under    the    CCS
                          (Pension)     Rules,    1972      in    respect   of    the
                          employees       of     the     Central      Government.

                          Therefore, the Court concluded that 50% of the
                          services rendered by the employee on daily
                          wages should be considered for computing
                          total length of service.

                                       26.The two Division Benches in the
                          cases of the State of Tamil Nadu rep. by its
                          Secretary to Government, (FR-2) Forest and
                          Environment Department, Fort St. George,
                          Chennai ? 600 009 v. S.Jayaraman [W.A.No.
                          1482    of     2016,     dated         22.01.2018]      and
                          Government       of    Tamil      Nadu     rep.   by     its
                          Secretary,       Environment              and         Forest
                          Department, Fort St. George, Chennai ? 600
                          009 v. S.Thillai Govindan [W.A.No.1733 of
                          2017, dated 13.02.2018] took note of the
                          decision in the case of B.Chinnaiyan, wherein
                          the cut-off date was quashed, dismissing the
                          appeals filed by the Government. Thus, the
                          decision in the case of B.Chinnaiyan has
                          received the seal of approval of the Hon'ble
                          Division Benches. Thus, in the present factual
                          position, whether the appellants are justified in
                          contending that the earlier Judgments are not
                          binding upon them, despite most of them
                          having been implemented by the appellants.



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                        26


                                     27.In our considered view, the stand
                          taken by the appellants is wholly unsustainable
                          as the Special Leave Petitions filed against
                          some of the decisions of the Hon'ble Division
                          Bench was not dismissed in limini, but were
                          dismissed on the ground that there were no
                          merits in the appeal. Therefore, the order
                          passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court has
                          assigned reasons and it is not a dismissal of a
                          Special Leave Petition simpliciter. Therefore,
                          the   decisions      bind     the        Government            and
                          consequently, the decisions relied on by the
                          learned Special Government Pleader in the
                          cases of Harpal Kaur Chahal (Smt) v. Director,
                          Punjab    Instructions,        Punjab           and     Another
                          reported in 1995 Supp (4) SCC 706 and
                          Col.B.J.Akkara (Retd.) v. Government of India
                          and Others reported in (2006)11 SCC 709 are
                          distinguishable on facts.

                                     28.The      Judgment           of    the     Division
                          Bench in the case of Principal Secretary, Social
                          Welfare   and        Nutritious      Meal         Programme
                          Department, Fort. St. George, Chennai and
                          Others v. M.Palanikani [W.A(MD)No.587 of
                          2014, etc. batch, dated 03.12.2014] does not
                          render    any   support        to    the        case     of    the
                          appellants, as the said case arose out of an
                          appointment            to          the           posts          of
                          Teachers/Supervisor          Grade         II     and     Rural
                          Welfare    Officers         from     those        who         were
                          functioning     as    Noon         Meal        Organisers       in



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                     27


                          Schools as well as Child Welfare Organizers in
                          Integrated Child Development Scheme (ICDS).
                          Thus, the appointment in those cases, were
                          fresh appointment to a different department,
                          unlike the case on hand. Further, the cases on
                          hand   are   not   cases    seeking   retrospective
                          regularisation, as sought for in the case of the
                          State of Tamil Nadu, rep. by the Secretary,
                          Department of Health and Family Welfare, Fort
                          St. George, Chennai and Others v. T.Gopal and
                          Others reported in 2016 Writ L.R. 1160.

                                    29.As noticed above, the decision to
                          bring the writ petitioners into regular time
                          scale of pay, was taken in the year 1999 and
                          the writ petitioners were extended the benefits
                          in the year 2009. By then, several of them, had
                          completed more than 30 years of service, as
                          daily wagers. The past service was reckoned
                          for the purpose of justifying their absorption
                          into regular time scale of pay. Therefore, it will
                          be a misnomer to state that the appointments
                          made to the post of Forest Watchers is a fresh
                          appointment. The stand taken by the appellants
                          in this regard is to be rejected by merely
                          referring to the preamble portion of G.O.
                          (Ms)No.64, dated 08.03.1999 and G.O.(Ms)No.
                          95, dated 07.08.2009. Therefore, the said
                          contention raised by the appellants required to
                          be outrightly rejected.

                                    30.There can be no denying the fact
                          that   the     appellants       themselves    have



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                      28


                          implemented various decisions of the Division
                          Benches, in some of which, no appeals were
                          preferred    to    the    Hon'ble     Supreme    Court.
                          Therefore, now to take a different stand in the
                          present appeals as well as writ petitions would
                          impermissible      and      a    situation   cannot   be
                          allowed     to    prevail       causing   discrimination
                          between similarly placed persons. Thus, in the
                          facts and circumstances of the case and in the
                          light of the above discussion, we find that the
                          State has not made any grounds to interfere
                          with the orders passed in the writ petitions and
                          therefore, the writ appeals are liable to be
                          dismissed and the similar writ petitions are
                          liable to be allowed.

                                      31.In the result,

                                      (i)W.A(MD)Nos.51 of 2018, 1431 and
                          1432 of 2017 are dismissed, confirming the
                          orders passed in W.P(MD)Nos.22833 of 2016,
                          15903 of 2012 and 22832 of 2016. No costs.
                          Consequently, connected C.M.P(MD)No.262 of
                          2018, 10923 and 10927 of 2017 are dismissed.

                                      (ii)All other writ petitions filed by the
                          Plot Watchers are allowed, as prayed for. No
                          costs. Consequently, connected W.M.P(MD)Nos.
                          4753 and 4754 of 2018 are closed.

                                      (iii)The     appellants/respondents       are
                          directed to verify the service particulars of all
                          the writ petitioners and count 50% of the
                          services rendered by them on temporary basis
                          and consequently refix their pension within a



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                       29


                          period of four months from the date of receipt
                          of a copy of this Judgment/ order.

                                       (iv)In        case,        where          the
                          petitioners/employees had died, the benefit
                          shall accrue to their legal heirs and the
                          payment shall be effected in the name of one of
                          the     legal     heirs    after     obtaining     proper
                          authorisation from the other legal heirs.

                                       (v)So far as W.P(MD)No.6878 of 2017
                          is concerned, though the petitioner seeks for
                          promotion to the post of Plot Watcher, the same
                          is a misnomer as it is not a promotion, but
                          absorption in the post of Forest Watcher.
                          Therefore, whatever the relief granted to the
                          other petitioners, shall enure in favour of this
                          petitioner also and the writ petition stands
                          disposed of accordingly. No costs.

                                       (vi)In    W.P(MD)No.22510        of   2015,
                          apart from seeking for regularisation of the
                          services by counting 50% of the services
                          rendered as Plot Watcher, the petitioner seeks
                          for pensionary benefits also. This Court has
                          directed that the benefit of 50% of the services
                          should be reckoned, while calculating the
                          length of service. Thus, if the petitioner has
                          attained the age of superannuation, it goes
                          without saying that consequential revision in
                          pensionary benefits are required to be settled
                          and    the      writ   petition    stands   disposed    of
                          accordingly. No costs.”

                                34. Yet another decision of another Division



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                        30


                          Bench of this Court, which is latest in this regard is
                          the decision made in WA(MD) No.844 of 2018
                          dated 03.07.2018 in the matter of State of Tamil
                          Nadu     represented      by       Secretary,   School
                          Education Department and others v. C.Jeya
                          Rani Gnana Devi.



                                   35. In the said judgment, dated 03.07.2018,
                          the Division Bench of this Court has passed the
                          following order:

                                         “4. When the matter is taken up for
                               hearing, the learned counsel appearing for the
                               respondent submitted that the issue involved in
                               the present writ appeal is covered by the
                               decision of a Division Bench of this Court dated
                               21.04.2017 made in W.A(MD)Nos.392, 393 and
                               389 of 2017 etc., batch, wherein the Division
                               Bench held as follows:

                                         “10. The Writ Court further observed
                               that in the light of the decision of the Hon'ble
                               First Bench, the Rule itself stands impliedly
                               overruled. That apart, it was held that if the
                               benefit is not granted, it would amount to
                               discriminating the similarly placed persons.
                               Further, the Writ Court noted that the
                               Government has chosen to extend certain
                               benefits in respect of part time workers as
                               found in G.O.Ms.No.39, 13.06.2011 and
                               therefore, the benefit cannot be denied to part
                               time vocational instructors by stating that the
                               said Government Order is applicable to
                               panchayat clerks and not to vocational
                               instructors.

                                         11. Learned Additional Government
                               Pleader   after elaborately referring to the



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                 31


                          factual matrix placed reliance on the decision
                          of the Division Bench in the case of the
                          Principal Secretary Social Welfare and
                          Nutritious Meal Programme Department and
                          others vs. M.Palanikani made in W.A.Nos.587
                          etc., batch dated 03.12.2014 and submitted
                          that the Division Bench has allowed the
                          appeals and set aside the order passed by the
                          learned single Judge wherein relief was
                          granted to count 50% of the services in the
                          noon meal scheme.

                                     12.Firstly, we may point out that the
                          terms of employment of staff in the noon meal
                          scheme are not in pari materia with that of the
                          terms of appointment of vocational instructors.

                          This fact cannot be denied by the appellants.
                          Furthermore, in paragraph 21 of the said
                          judgment, the Court framed the question which
                          has to be decided with a specific reference and
                          a cutt off date which had been fixed namely, on
                          01.04.2003. Admittedly, all the writ petitioners
                          were appointed much prior to the said date and
                          the decision of the Hon'ble Division Bench is
                          factually distinguishable. Thus, we are of the
                          considered view that the impugned order
                          having been rendered by referring to and
                          relying upon the decisions of the Hon'ble First
                          Bench, we find no grounds to take a different
                          view in the matter. Accordingly, the writ
                          appeals are dismissed. No Costs. Consequently,
                          connected miscellaneous petitions are closed.”

                                    5.    Mr.Baskarapandian,      learned
                          Special Government Pleader appearing for the
                          appellants also fairly submitted that the issue
                          involved in the present writ appeal is covered
                          by the decision relied on by the learned
                          counsel for the respondent.

                                    6. In view of the submissions made
                          by the learned counsel on either side, following

                          the judgment made in W.A(MD)Nos.392, 393

                          and 389 of 2017 etc., batch dated 21.04.2017,



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                             32


                                  the writ appeal is liable to be dismissed and
                                  accordingly, the same is dismissed. No Costs.
                                  Consequently,          connected     Miscellaneous
                                  Petition is closed.”

                                        36. From the reading of the aforesaid
                          judgments, especially, the later decisions rendered
                          by two Division Benches of this Court, it become
                          clear that, the view taken by this Court insofar as
                          the confirmation of benefit of calculating 50% of the
                          past services rendered by the employees, who
                          worked as Vocational Instructors or otherwise on
                          temporary basis before they brought in regular time
                          scale of pay and regular absorption, had been
                          consistently followed by various Division Benches of
                          this Court.

                                        37. There had been earlier judgments of
                          the Division Benches and there had been later
                          judgments of the Division Benches including the
                          recent one passed, just before a week or two. While
                          so,     the    only    Division    Bench         decision     dated
                          06.04.2018 made in W.A.No.882/2017, as has been
                          relied upon by the learned Special Government
                          Pleader takes a slightly different view, where also,
                          the principle in extending the said benefit had been
                          accepted, but the only prohibition was that the same
                          shall    not    be    extended     hereafter       to   any   such
                          employee,        who     comes      to     the     Court,     after
                          06.04.2018. In this regard, the learned counsel for
                          the petitioners have relied upon a Full Bench


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                                  33


                          judgment of the Patna High Court reported in AIR
                          1987           Patna     191, in Amarsingh Yadav                   and
                          another v. Shanti Devi and others.



                                          38. One of the question posed before the
                          Full Bench for resolvement is as follows:

                                                  “(1) Where there is a direct conflict
                                    between two decisions of the Supreme Court,
                                    rendered by co-equal Benches, which of them
                                    should be followed by the High Court and the
                                    Court below ?”





                                          39. After elaborate consideration, the Full
                          Bench has given its answer, which reads thus:

                                                  “24. To conclude on this aspect, it is
                                    held that where there is a direct conflict
                                    between two decisions of the Supreme Court
                                    rendered by co-equal Benches, the High Court
                                    must follow that judgment which appears to it
                                    to    state     the   law   more    elaborately    and
                                    accurately. The answer to question (1) posed at
                                    the outset is rendered in these terms.”

                                          40.     Therefore,      the   principle     was,    as
                          enunciated in the said Full Bench judgment of the
                          Patna High Court that, if two conflicting decisions
                          are available, rendered by co-equal benches, the
                          High Court must follow the judgment, which appears
                          to   it    to     state     the   law    more    elaborately       and
                          accurately.



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                     34


                                   41. If the said principle is applied to the
                          facts of the present case, except the decision dated
                          06.04.2018 of a Division Bench of this Court, no
                          other Division Bench either prior to or after to that,
                          has taken any different view, as the one taken in the
                          said judgment and in all other Division Bench
                          judgments, a uniform and consistent stand taken by
                          this Court was that, the benefit of taking into
                          account 50% of the services rendered by the
                          employees before they brought into regular service
                          shall be the basis for calculating for the purpose of
                          pension and retiral benefits. Even in the said
                          judgment dated 06.04.2018 in W.A.No.882/2017,
                          that view was accepted and endorsed by the said
                          Division Bench also, but the only embargo the
                          Division Bench has put in that, the said benefit
                          cannot be extended to those who come to the Court
                          hereafter.   In order to meet out the said embargo,
                          the aforesaid judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court,
                          as referred to above, with regard to the continuous
                          cause of action and the benefit, which has been
                          declared by the Court through a judgment in rem
                          has to be extended to similarly placed persons, had
                          been quoted.

                                   42. In view of the settled legal position, as
                          has been declared in all these decisions, all these
                          petitioners, even though filed writ petitions recently
                          and some of them might have filed after 06.04.2018




http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                      35


                          i.e., the date, on which the aforesaid Division Bench
                          Judgment had been rendered by this Court, in the
                          opinion of this Court, are entitled to get the similar
                          benefits, as that of the benefits which have already
                          been given to the number of similarly placed
                          employees / Teachers.

                                     43. Therefore, the observations made in the
                          aforesaid judgment made in W.A.No.882 of 2017 and
                          etc., batch, as has been heavily relied upon by the
                          learned Special Government Pleader in this regard,
                          would no way advance the case of the respondents
                          and that no way be helpful to the respondents to
                          deny the lawful right of the petitioners, which have
                          already been accrued and has been continuously
                          accruing    every   month   because   the   pensionary
                          benefits are to be disbursed till the death of the
                          employee / death of the legal heirs. Therefore, the
                          said objection raised by the respondents are liable to
                          be rejected, accordingly, they are rejected.

                                     44. In view of the aforesaid judgments,
                          wherein the issue as has been put forth by the
                          learned counsel for the petitioners, having been
                          dealt with and decided more than once by the Writ
                          Court and the same has been confirmed by the
                          Division Bench of this Court more than once and in
                          cases, where SLP preferred before the Hon'ble
                          Supreme Court, wherein also the view taken by this
                          Court has been confirmed, all these petitioners are




http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                       36


                          entitled to, for calculating 50% of the past services,
                          rendered by each of the petitioners in the respective
                          employment before they got absorbed by bringing
                          them under the time scale of pay irrespective of the
                          years of service, for the purpose of pensionary
                          benefits.     Hence, these petitioners also shall be
                          entitled to get the same benefits and accordingly, all
                          these writ petitions are fit to succeed.

                                      45. In the result, these writ petitions are
                          allowed and the respective respondents in each of
                          the writ petitions are hereby directed to take into
                          account the 50% of the past services rendered by
                          each   of    the   petitioners    either   as   Vocational
                          Instructors or any other employment either as a Part
                          Time / Full time / adhoc / temporary / daily wages
                          employees before they brought in under the regular
                          time scale of pay on permanent basis or absorption
                          and by calculating the said 50% of their past service,
                          pension eligibility and pension enhancement or
                          difference of pay and pension shall be calculated
                          and disbursed in favour of the respective petitioners.
                          After fixing the revised pension by taking into
                          account the past 50% services, the revised pension
                          arrears shall be calculated and to be disbursed to
                          the petitioners within a period of 12 weeks from the
                          date of receipt of a copy of this order. It is needless
                          to mention that the petitioners shall continue to
                          receive the revised pension.



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                         37


                                      46. Insofar as W.P.(MD)Nos.6065 of 2016
                            and 6789 of 2017 are concerned, the petitioners
                            since having not been paid any pension so far, the
                            aforesaid exercise shall be undertaken by the
                            respective respondents in that writ petitions also
                            and the entire arrears of pension shall be disbursed
                            to the said petitioners within the said time frame
                            indicated above.

                                      47. Insofar as W.P.(MD)No.11896 of 2018 is
                            concerned, since the petitioner is the widow of the
                            employee,     the   pensionary     benefits    shall   be
                            calculated, accordingly, as indicated, and arrears till
                            the death of the petitioner's husband shall be
                            calculated and thereafter, the family pension arrears
                            shall be calculated and all the arrears shall be
                            disbursed to the petitioner i.e., the widow of the
                            employee, within the period of twelve weeks, from
                            the date of receipt of a copy of this order.

                                      48. With these directions all these writ
                            petitions are allowed as indicated above. No costs.”





                               8. Since the said issue has been considered and decided already

                      in number of cases and in some of the cases, even though appeal filed

                      before the Hon'ble Apex Court, the decision rendered by this Court has

                      been confirmed and accordingly, in those cases, the orders passed by this




http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                           38


                      Court have been complied with. When that being the position, since some

                      of the petitioners herein are still working as Teachers and some of them

                      have already retired, and in both, the benefits now sought by these

                      petitioners given raise to them as a continuous cause of action and

                      therefore, the accrued right on the part of the petitioners and it is still

                      accruing every month, cannot be taken away merely by placing a

                      predicament or impediment that those, who approaches this Court

                      belatedly, cannot be granted the relief or extended the similar relief

                      extended to similar persons.



                                9. In this regard, in the aforesaid decision of Mine, I have given a

                      detailed and thorough consideration on the case laws and in view of the

                      settled legal propositions, the said embargo, as has been taken by the

                      learned Special Government Pleader in this batch of cases, by citing the

                      said Division Bench judgment dated 06.04.2018, cannot be applicable to

                      these cases also. Hence, this Court has no hesitation to grant the similar

                      relief, which have already been granted to similarly placed persons, to

                      these writ petitioners also.



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                             39


                                  10. Accordingly, all these writ petitions are ordered in the terms

                      of the said order dated 09.07.2018 by giving the following directions:



                                          “the respective respondents in each of the writ
                            petitions are hereby directed to take into account the 50%
                            of the past services rendered by each of the petitioners
                            either as Vocational Instructors or any other employment
                            either as a Part Time / Full time / adhoc / temporary /
                            daily wages employees before they brought in under the
                            regular time scale of pay on permanent basis or absorption
                            and by calculating the said 50% of their past service,
                            pension eligibility and pension enhancement or difference
                            of pay and pension shall be calculated and disbursed in
                            favour of the respective petitioners.       After fixing the
                            revised pension by taking into account the past 50%
                            services, the revised pension arrears shall be calculated
                            and to be disbursed to the petitioners within a period of 12
                            weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this order. It is
                            needless to mention that the petitioners shall continue to
                            receive the revised pension.”

                      No costs.




                                                                              26.07.2018
                      Index       : Yes
                      Internet    : Yes
                      ta




http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            40




                                                                               R.SURESH KUMAR,J.

                                                                                               ta

                      To


                      1.The Principal Secretary to Government,
                        School Education Department,
                        Fort St.George, Chennai-600 009.



                      2.The Director of School Education,
                        DPI Complex, College Road,
                        Chennai-600 006.



                      3.The Joint Director of School Education (Vocational),
                        O/o. the Director of School Education,
                        DPI Complex, College Road,
                        Chennai-600 006.



                      4.The Chief Educational Officer,
                        O/o. Chief Educational Officer,
                        Theni District, Theni.



                                                    W.P.(MD)Nos.16455 to 16461 and 16433 of 2018




                                                                                       26.07.2018




http://www.judis.nic.in


