



[Cites 
35
, Cited by 
0
]




Gujarat High Court


Gujarat vs Natwarlal on 4 March, 2010


Author: 
H.K.Rathod


Bench: 
H.K.Rathod


   Gujarat High Court Case Information System 

  
  
    

 
 
    	      
         
	    
		   Print
				          

  


	 
	 
	 
	 
	 
	 
	 
	


 


	 

SCA/1161/2010	 12/ 22	JUDGMENT 
 
 

	

 

IN
THE HIGH COURT OF GUJARAT AT AHMEDABAD
 

SPECIAL
CIVIL APPLICATION No. 1161 of 2010
 

 
 
For
Approval and Signature:  
HONOURABLE
MR.JUSTICE H.K.RATHOD Sd-
 
 
=========================================================

 
	  
	 
	  
		 
			 

1
		
		 
			 

Whether
			Reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the judgment ?
		
	

 
	  
	 
	  
		 
			 

2
		
		 
			 

To be
			referred to the Reporter or not ?
		
	

 
	  
	 
	  
		 
			 

3
		
		 
			 

Whether
			their Lordships wish to see the fair copy of the judgment ?
		
	

 
	  
	 
	  
		 
			 

4
		
		 
			 

Whether
			this case involves a substantial question of law as to the
			interpretation of the constitution of India, 1950 or any order
			made thereunder ?
		
	

 
	  
	 
	  
		 
			 

5
		
		 
			 

Whether
			it is to be circulated to the civil judge ?
		
	

 

=========================================================

 

GUJARAT
HOUSING BOARD & 1 - Petitioner(s)
 

Versus
 

NATWARLAL
JAGJIVAN MADIA & 2 - Respondent(s)
 

=========================================================
 
Appearance
: 
MR
HS MUNSHAW for
Petitioner(s) : 1 - 2. 
None for Respondent(s) : 1 -
3. 
=========================================================


 
	  
	 
	  
		 
			 

CORAM
			: 
			
		
		 
			 

HONOURABLE
			MR.JUSTICE H.K.RATHOD
		
	

 

 
 


 

Date
: 04/03/2010 

 

ORAL
JUDGMENT 


Heard
	learned Advocate Mr. HS Munshaw for petitioners.



By
	filing this petition under 
Article 227
 of the Constitution of India,
	petitioner Gujarat Housing Board has challenged order passed by
	Controlling Authority, Rajkot in Gratuity Case NO. 73 of 2008
	decided on 9th March, 2009wherein Controlling Authority
	has granted Rs.26,338.00 being interest on delayed payment of
	Rs.1,58,565.00, for a period of about one year, seven months and 28
	days at the rate of 10 per cent and remaining due amount of 10 %
	Gratuity which comes to Rs.36,198/- with 10 per cent simple interest
	has been granted with effect from 1.8.2006. Aforesaid order passed
	by the controlling authority, Rajkot was challenged by petitioner
	before appellate authority, Rajkot in Appeal NO. 42 of 2009 which
	came to be dismissed by appellate authority, Rajkot on 28.8.2009. 



Learned
	Advocate Mr. Munshaw for petitioner has raised number of contentions
	before this Court. According to his submissions, respondent NO.1
	herein who was born on 9.5.1955 was an employee of Gujarat Housing
	Board and joined service as work charge clerk on 13.11.1973 and was
	made regular in service on 8.12.1983 and later on his application
	for voluntary retirement was accepted and accordingly, he retired on
	30.6.2006. It was his submission that petitioner board was earlier
	having Contributory Provident Fund Scheme for its employees but
	after careful consideration of the request of the employees, it was
	thought fit to adopt the pension scheme of the State Government and
	a Circular dated 12.11.1991 was issued through which the Scheme was
	implemented. He submitted that accordingly, provisions of Gujarat
	Civil Service Rules/Bombay Civil Service Rules are made applicable
	for benefits to employees of petitioner board. He submitted that
	respondent NO.1 gave his option for pension scheme and accordingly
	his case was to be considered for calculation of pension as well as
	gratuity as provided under the Gujarat Civil Service Rules. He
	submitted that as per the provisions of the Gujarat Civil Service
	Rules, pension includes retirement cum death gratuity and,
	therefore, gratuity was also to be calculated accordingly. He
	submitted that an order dated 27.2.2008 was passed by Administrative
	Officer of petitioner board through which respondent no.1 herein who
	retired as a junior clerk, was ordered to be paid pension on the
	basis of his last drawn salary. In all, 31 years service was counted
	for calculation of pension. Gratuity amounting to Rs.1,58,565/- was
	calculated on the basis of 31 years service. Respondent No.1 who
	joined service on 13.11.1973 and retired on 30.6.2006 was granted
	benefit of pension and gratuity on the basis of 31 years service as
	through orders dated 24.8.07, it was ordered that the period
	commencing from 13.3.76 to 8.5.78 was not to be counted for the
	purpose of pension. He also submitted that the impugned orders
	passed by respondent no.3 and 2 respectively are illegal, unjust,
	arbitrary and contrary to facts and evidence on record as well as
	without jurisdiction. He further submitted that as such, petitioner
	board is a statutory body under total administrative control and
	supervision of Government of Gujarat and it has accepted and adopted
	provisions of Gujarat Civil Service Rules  and policy of State. He
	submited that services of present respondent no.1 was counted for
	the purpose of pension and gratuity in accordance with  Gujarat
	Civil Service Rules and retirement benefits like pension and
	gratuity to its employees accordingly, in other words, the
	calculations for payment of pension and gratuity are made as per
	provisions of  Gujarat Civil Service Rules and policy of State. He
	submits that services of respondent no.1 herein was counted for the
	purpose of pension and gratuity in accordance with the provisions of
	 Gujarat Civil Service Rules and accordingly, payment of gratuity
	was made. It is submitted that the gratuity was not liable to be
	paid under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972
 and, therefore, there
	is no question of jurisdiction of respondent no.2 and 3 against the
	order of Gujarat Housing Board as said authorities have no authority
	to decide such calculation under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972
.
	He further submitted that the calculation of gratuity is made as per
	the provisions of  Gujarat Civil Service Rules and after considering
	total length of service of the respondent no.1 herein. It is also
	submitted that through orders dated 24.8.07  passed by Housing
	Commissioner, 31 years service is to be counted for the purpose of
	pension and gratuity as two years service was treated as without
	pay. It is also submitted that respondent no.2 and 3 have ignored
	issues like applicability of provisions of  Gujarat Civil Service
	Rules, issue of jurisdiction and total length of service etc. raised
	before the authorities and allowed application for interest at the
	rate of 10 per cent on delayed payment. It is also submitted that
	respondent no.2 and 3 have erred in not appreciating whether
	respondent no.1 herein was treated as Government servant for the
	purpose of benefit of pension and gratuity and grievance, if any, is
	represented before appropriate authority. It is submitted that in
	case of delayed payment, interest at the rate of 6 per cent is
	required to be paid. It is also submitted that respondent no.1 has
	not challenged orders passed by Gujarat Housing Board through which
	it is decided that in all 31 years service is to be calculated for
	purpose of pension and gratuity and has become final and conclusive.
	In view of this, respondent no.2 and 3 have no authority to order to
	calculate pension and gratuity on the basis of 33 years. It is
	submitted that wrong calculation by any incompetent authority would
	not only result into heavy burden to the public exchequer but also
	set a bad precedent as the respondent no.1 herein is not eligible
	and entitled for payment of gratuity under the provisions of the
	
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972
.  In light of aforesaid contentions
	raised by learned Advocate MR. Munshaw and considering draft
	amendment which has been placed on record and granted by this court
	on 22nd February, 2010, it is submitted that pension
	scheme being package, it includes amount of gratuity which has been
	accepted by respondent no.1 and thereafter, raising of dispute and
	disputing amount of gratuity paid by petitioner is amounting to
	committing breach of undertaking given by respondent no.1 and same
	is contrary to package scheme of petitioner. Petitioner has placed
	on record by way of draft amendment, certain documents which would
	go to suggest that pension scheme has been accepted by petitioner
	board and accordingly, options were invited from concerned employees
	and such option was exercised by present respondent and on that
	basis, pension amount has been paid by respondent no.1 as well as
	amount of gratuity which is part of pension scheme paid and yet,
	respondent no.1 has disputed amount of gratuity and claimed amount
	of gratuity under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act
, for that, according
	to him, respondent no.1 is not entitled and respondent is entitled
	to amount of grauity only under the pension scheme  which has been
	accepted by respondent no.1 and, therefore, this aspect has not been
	properly considered by controlling authority as well as appellate
	authority and, therefore, this petition has been filed by petitioner
	before this Court. Except these submissions, no other submission is
	made by learned Advocate Mr. HS Munshaw before this Court. 



I
	have considered submissions made by learned Advocate Mr. Munshaw
	before this court. I have also perused order passed by controlling
	authority as well as order passed by appellate authority wherein
	order passed by controlling authority has been confirmed by
	dismissing appeal preferred by petitioner. 



It
	is necessary to consider relevant provisions of 
Payment of Gratuity
	Act, 1972
. Provisions of said Act are applicable to petitioner
	establishment as per 
section 1 (3) (b)
 and (c) and this fact has not
	been disputed by learned Advocate Mr. Munshaw before this Court. Not
	only that but this fact has also not been disputed by petitioner
	either before controlling authority or appellate authority under the
	
Payment of Gratuity Act
 and, therefore, Act is made applicable to
	petitioner establishment. 
Section 4
 sub section (5) of said Act
	provides that nothing in this section shall affect the right of an
	employee to receive better terms of gratuity under any award or
	agreement or contract with the employer. 
Section 5
 of Act is giving
	power to appropriate Government  by notification and subject to such
	conditions as may be specified in notification to exempt any
	establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway
	company or shop to which this Act applies from operation of
	provisions of this Act if, in the opinion of appropriate Government,
	the employees of such establishment as aforesaid are in receipt of
	gratuity or pensionary benefits not less favourable than the
	benefits conferred under this Act. Sub section (3) of 
section 5
 of
	Act provides that a notification issued under sub-section (1) or sub
	section (2) may be issued retrospectively a date not earlier than
	the date of commencement of the Act but no such notification shall
	be issued so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person.
	It is not disputed by petitioner that petitioner establishment has
	not been exempted by appropriate Government under 
section 5
 and
	concerned employee is also not exempted under sub section (2) of
	
section 5
 of the Act. As per 
section 14
 of this Act, provisions of
	this Act or any rule made thereunder shall have effect
	notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any
	enactment other than this Act or in any instrument or contract
	having effect by virtue of any enactment other than by this Act.
	Aforesaid provisions of the 
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972
 are
	mandatory in nature and same are relevant for deciding issue which
	has been raised by learned Advocate Mr. Munshaw for petitioner
	before this Court. 



Pension
	scheme which has been accepted by respondent no.1 includes benefit
	of gratuity but amount of gratuity is less favourable than the claim
	made under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act
, therefore, respondent
	workman is entitled to claim such benefit as per the provisions of
	
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972
. This being statutory right available
	to respondent workman, it has been rightly examined by controlling
	authority after considering last drawn salary of employee and
	respondent is also covered by definition of 
section 2(e)
 of Payment
	of Gratuity Act, 1972. Continuity of service as defined under
	
section 2(c)
 of Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 has also been rightly
	considered by Controlling Authority and Appellate Authority under
	the 
Payment of Gratuity Act
 and provisions of said Act are
	applicable to petitioner establishment and last drawn salary
	Rs.10230.00 divided by 26 and then to find out one day salary and on
	that basis amount of gratuity has been calculated by controlling
	authority considering total 33 years service,for that, employee is
	entitled for wages of days as claim of gratuity and accordingly
	order has been passed by controlling authority and same aspects were
	rightly considered by appellate authority and appellate authority
	has rightly come to conclusion that controlling authority has
	rightly passed order and it requires no interference. Appellate
	authority has rightly come to conclusion that under 
section 2 (4)
,
	petitioner being commercial establishment, provisions of 
Payment of
	Gratuity Act, 1972
 would apply. Appellate authority has relied upon
	decision of this Court reported in case of Jayaben Suryakant Modi
	and others versus Gujarat Labour Welfare Boad and others, 1997 Lab
	IC 2581 wherein it has been held that provisions of 
Gratuity Act
 are
	applicable to Labour Welfare Board considering it a commercial
	establishment as per 
section 2(4)
 of the Act. Considering activity
	of petitioner establishment of construction of house and sale
	thereof on hire purchase basis, petitioner establishment has been
	held to be commercial establishment. 



This
	Court had an occasion to consider same question in group of
	petitions being Special Civil Application NO. 2138 of 2002 and other
	allied matters decided by this court on 27.2.2002. Relevant
	discussion made by this Court in para 14 to 21 of said decision of
	this court dated 27.2.2002 is quoted as under: 



 14.	However,
	other contention raised by learned advocate Ms.Jhaveri is in respect
	to Rules framed by the Nagarpalika, which has been sanctioned by the
	Government of Guajrat, while exercising power under 
Section 271(a)

	of the Gujarat Municipalities Act,1963. Accordingly, she relied upon
	Rule-5 which for the purpose of calculation of gratuity only basic
	pay as defined under BCSR Rules will be taken into account exclusive
	of dearness allowance. The gratuity will be paid on the basis of the
	average of last 12 months  pay preceding the date of the relieve
	from service. The contention is that because the concerned employee
	is governed by BCSR Rules and Gratuity Rules as referred above,
	provisions of the Act are not applicable. 
The Himachal Pradesh High
	Court has considered this aspect in the case of  
State of Himachal
	Pradesh v. Lashkari Ram

	reported in 2008-I-LLJ-137 wherein after considering the 
	definition of "employee" under 
Section 2(e)
 of the Act and
	after considering the Central Civil Services Rules (Pension),1972
	and employee having worked in different capacity, was held to be
	entitled to get benefits of 
Gratuity Act
 as well as Civil Service
	Rule (Pension) Rules.
 Whether Rules prevailed or the Act, that
	question was also examined by the Apex Court in case of Jashwant
	Singh Gill (supra). The Apex Court has considered the Rules framed
	by the Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. are not statutory rules and they have
	been made by the holding company of respondent No.1. 
The Payment of
	Gratuity Act
 was enacted with a view to provide for a scheme for
	payment of gratuity to the employees engaged inter alia in mines.

 
The Act
 provides for close - knit scheme providing for payment of
	gratuity. It is a complete code containing detailed provisions
	covering the essential provisions of a scheme for a gratuity. It not
	only creates a right to payment of gratuity but also lays down the
	principles  for quantification thereof as also the conditions on
	which he may be denied therefrom. A statutory right accrued, thus, 
	cannot be impaired by reason of a rule which does not have the force
	of a statute. The provisions of the Act, therefore, must prevail
	over the Rules.



15.	In
	aforesaid decision, there were no statutory rules but, in facts of
	this case, there may be   statutory rules. The Apex Court has
	considered similar aspect in case of  
Eid
	Parry (I) Ltd. v. G. Omkar Murthy and Others
 reported in 2001 (4)
	SCC 68. Relevant observations made in Para.2, 3 and 4 are quoted as
	under :




"2.	Four
	contentions are put forth before us, namely, that 
	
	 


(i)
	The Central Act prevails over the State Act by virtue of 
Article 254

	of the Constitution and Section 40(3) is invalid and the claims are
	unsustainable; 



(ii)
	Section 40(3) of the State Act stood repealed on the coming into
	force of the 
Andhra Pradesh Shops and Establishments Act, 1988
 and
	gratuity became payable under Section 47(5) of the State Act where
	payment of gratuity is not payable under the Central Act;



(iii)
	Section 14 of the Central Act overrides other enactments in relation
	to gratuity, and 
	
	 



	(iv) The respondents have
	been paid gratuity under the Central Act for the period covered and
	for the balance period of service gratuity is paid under the
	prevailing trust scheme.



At
	the relevant time when the respondents voluntarily
	retired from service the definition of 'employee' under Section 2(e)
	of the Central Act read as not to include employee whose wages
	exceeded Rs. 1,000/- per mensem while the respondents-employees were
	all getting wages more than Rs. 1,600/- per mensem and, therefore,
	the Central Act could not be applied. If that is so, it is certainly
	permissible for the respondents to have made an application for
	payment of gratuity under Section 40(3) of the State Act. Further
	the scheme of the Central Act would indicate that it would not be
	applicable in cases where the State Act is more beneficial than the
	Central Act. In this case, the finding is that the State Act is more
	beneficial than the Central Act. Therefore, the contentions sought
	to be advanced on behalf of the appellant as to repugnancy or
	otherwise of the State Act would not arise at all. If both the
	enactments can co-exist and can operate where one Act or the other
	is not available then we find no difficulty in making the State Act
	applicable on the fact situation available as has been done in the
	present case. Therefore, we find that the contentions raised on
	behalf of the appellant are unsustainable.



3.
	Shri Narayan B. Shetye, the learned Senior Advocate appearing for
	the appellant, submitted that the Central Act is a complete Code
	containing detailed provisions and creates right
	of payment of gratuity and, therefore, the Central Act should
	prevail over the State Act. Reliance has been placed on the decision
	of this Court in 
State of Punjab v. Labour
 Court, Jullundur, (1980)
	1 SCR 953 : (AIR 1979 SC 1981 : 1980 Lab IC 1084). In that case the
	issue before the Court was whether for payment of gratuity an
	application could be made under 
Section 33-C(2)
 of the Industrial
	Disputes Act, 1947, and
	it was held that such an application could not be filed under the
	said Act. Therefore, this decision cannot be of any assistance to
	the appellant inasmuch as the question before us is whether the
	Central Act or the State Act would apply for payment of gratuity.




	4. The decision in M.S.R.
	Murthy v. Arya Somayajula Yagneswara Chenulu, 1985 Lab IC 189 (Andh
	Pra) also is of no use to the appellant inasmuch as the State Act is
	held not to operate to the extent the Central Act prevails. In the
	present case, on facts, it is found that the Central Act is not
	applicable."



15.1	In
aforesaid two decisions, the Apex Court has considered the fact that
even when statutory rules are available, the provisions of the Act
prevail.  Therefore, in this case though services rules may be  
statutory, considering 
Section 14
 of the Act, provisions of the Act
should  prevail.



16.	The contention raised
by learned advocate Ms.Jhaveri that 
Gratuity Act
 is not applicable to
the Nagarpalika being the local authority, cannot be accepted as the
Nagarpalika is covered by definition of 'establishment' and the
provisions of the 
Gratuity Act
 are applicable. 
Section 1(3)(b)
 of the
Act wherein definition 'establishment' is provided, which reads,
thus,
 

 


 


"every shop or
establishment within the meaning of any law for the time being in
force in relation to shops and establishment in a State, in which ten
or more persons are employed, or were employed, on any day of the
preceding twelve months."  



16.1 The aforesaid
contention is not accepted because the local authority being an
establishment covered under the 
Gratuity Act, the Gratuity Act
 is
applicable as has been held  by the Madras High Court in
case of  
Commissioner, Sathyamangalam Municipality v. Deputy
Commissioner of Labour (Appellate Authority
 under 
Payment of Gratuity
Act
), Salem and others reported in 2004 III LLJ 995 wherein
it has been observed by the Madras High Court that, "
Payment of
Gratuity Act,1972
 - 
Secs.2(e)
, 
5
 and 
7
(3-A)- Local authority also
established liable under Act to pay gratuity - Award of interest to
employee for period after expiry of 30 days from retirement, held
proper.
 
Even the Panchayat is also considered to be an
establishment under the provisions of the 
Gratuity Act and the Act
 is
applicable as decided by Madhya Pradesh High Court in the case of
 
S.N.Verma v. State of M.P. and others
 reported in 2004-I-LLJ-560.
Relevant observations in the aforesaid decision is in Para.6 which is
quoted as under :




"6.	Thus the
Panchayat is indisputedly a 'local body' and if it is employing more
than  ten persons it would be an 'establishment' within the meaning
of the notification given above. An employee of an Panchayat is
entitled to the payment of gratuity as per provisions of 
Payment of
Gratuity Act,1972
 unless under any other rule of the Panchayat or the
State Government he has a right to receive 'better terms of gratuity"

as per 
Section 4(5)
 of the Act. Though there is an observation in the
judgment dated June 27, 1997 in W.P.No.1743 of 1997 that the gratuity
is payable to the Panchayat employees as per Madhya Pradesh Janpad
Panchayat Employees (Qualifications, Recruitment and Conditions of
Service) Rules,1976, on a perusal of these rules it is conceded that
there is no provision in these rules for payment of gratuity. In such
a situation an employee of the Panchayat would be entitled to
gratuity as per 
Payment of Gratuity Act,1972
. The Supreme Court has
held in 
Bakshish Singh v. Darshan Engineering Works
, AIR 1994 SC 251
: 1994 (1) SSC	9 : 1994-I-LLJ-197 that the provisions for payment of
gratuity contained in 
Section 4(1)(b)
 of the Act are one of the
minimal service conditions, which must be made available to the
employees notwithstanding the financial capacity of the employer to
bear its burden. It is settled  law that the establishments which
have no capacity to give to their workmen the minimum conditions of
service prescribed by the statute have no right to exist. The
respondent Janpad Panchayat is admittedly employing  more than ten
persons and therefore the petitioner who was its employee is entitled
to gratuity under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act,1972
."




16.2	The
Delhi High Court in case of  
Municipal Corporation of Delhi
v. Smt. V.T.Naresh and Anr.
  reported in 1986-I-LLJ-323 relying
upon the decision of Apex Court in case of 
State
of Punjab v. Labour
 Court of Jullundur and others reported
in 1981-I-LLJ- 354, it is held that a Corporation and/or local
authority like Municipal Commissioner of Delhi is an establishment
governed by 
Payment of Gratuity Act,1972
. The word "establishment'
in the 
Gratuity Act
 is not controlled by any type of establishment
and it will include commercial, public sector establishment."
Relevant observations in the aforesaid decisions are in Para.6 and 7
which are quoted as under :




"6.	It will be
noticed that the word "establishment" used in the aforesaid
clause of 
Payment of Gratuity Act,1972
 is not controlled by any type
of establishment. It will include commercial, public sector
establishment, private sector establishment as also the
non-commercial establishment. Therefore, it is merely because
Municipal Corporation of Delhi which is created by 
Delhi Municipal
Corporation Act,1957
 is also a local body or local authority, it does
not mean that the Corporation will not be an "establishment"

so long as it is so in relation to any law relating to
"establishment". It need not multiply the instances. Only
one is sufficient to make the Act applicable. I have, thus, no doubt
that the Municipal Corporation of Delhi is an "establishment"
within the meaning of
 S.1
, Sub-s.(3) Cl.(b) of the Act. 



7.	Coming to the second
point, even if Municipal Corporation of Delhi has certain schemes, it
is no bar  to the applicability of the employees of the petitioner -
Corporation. It is only common which can be said that an employee
cannot have benefit of both under 
Payment of Gratuity Act
 as well as 
scheme of regulations/pension framed by the Corporation but if he has
availed  of the benefit under 
Payment of Gratuity Act
, to that extent
benefit will be denied to him under the regulations/pension scheme
framed by the Corporation. If the scheme framed by the Corporation
gives higher benefit to the extent the employee obtains benefit under
the "
Payment of Gratuity Act
, to that extent those benefits will
be adjusted while claiming benefit under the Scheme of
Regulations/pensions framed by the Corporation. The employee cannot
have complete benefit under both the 
Payment of Gratuity Act
 as well
as under the Scheme of regulations/pensions. To the extent the
benefit has been granted to him under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act
,
only to that extent the benefit will be adjusted while enforcing the
scheme of regulations/pension framed by the Corporation. Similarly,
if under a Scheme framed by the Corporation the benefit is less than
that which is available in the 
Payment of Gratuity Act
, the employee
will be entitled to claim difference under the 
Payment of Gratuity
Act
. No other point was argued. The petition, therefore, fails and is
dismissed. Since nobody has put in appearance on behalf of the
respondent, parties are left to bear their own costs."



17.	The Allahabad High
Court in case of Nagar Palika, Moradabad v. Appellate Authority and
Additional Labour Commissioner, U.P. Kanpur & others, reported in
1990-II-LLJ-156, it has been held that municipal board is an
'establishment' governed by the 
Payment of Gratuity Act,1972
.
Relevant observations of the said decision are in Para.8, 9 and 10
which are quoted as under : 



"8.	Sub.Sec.(3) of

S.1
 lays down that the provisions of the Act are to apply to every
establishment in which 10 or more persons are employed.



9.	The argument sought to
be advanced by the  learned counsel for the petitioner is that the
Municipal Board cannot be described as an 'establishment' because the
word 'establishment' connotes some business institution or atleast it
may include a public institution. Such a definition of a word
'establishment' is to be found in Black's Legal Dictionary.



10.	I am afraid the
argument is not sustainable. The activities which are carried on by
the Municipal Board do go to make it a public institution
undoubtedly. In fact, Municipal Board, or for that matter, such local
bodies do exist to cater to the needs of the general public and,
therefore, many statutory duties have been  conferred upon such
bodies. To say that in spite of those functions which have to be
carried out by those institutions in accordance with the mandate of
law, those do not become public institutions is too bald an argument
to be accepted."



18.	This Court has, in
case of   
Dabhoi Nagarpalika  and Anr. v. S.J.Khedia and Anr.

1996 II CLR 910, held that 
Payment of Gratuity Act
 is applicable
to the Nagarpalika.




19.	The Karnataka High
Court in case of 
Management of Sir Venkataramana Temple and Sri Hale
Mariyamma Temple, Kapu, Udupi District v. Deputy Labour Commissioner
and the Appellate Authority
 under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act,1972
,
Hassan Region, and Others reported in 2008-I-LLJ-122, has observed in
Para.12 and 14 as under :




"12.	On these rival
contentions and on a further examination of the case-law, it is clear
that the word 'establishment' in 
Section 1(3)(b)
 of the Payment of
Gratuity Act,1972 is not to be restricted as referring to 'commercial
establishments' alone. 
The Act
 has been held to apply even to
institutions which were exempted under the 
Shops and Establishments
Act
 (see : 
Principal, Bhartiya Mahavidalaya, Amravati and Another v.
Ramakrishna Wasudeo Lahudkar 1994-II-LLJ-556 (Bom.
). There is no
doubt that a liberal construction has to be given to the expression
and any institution or organization where systematic activity is
carried on, by employing ten or more persons, would fall within the
ambit of the provision.




14.	The further contention
that the employee ought to have had recourse to remedies prescribed
under the provisions of KHRI and CE Act is also not tenable. The
employee is certainly entitled to elect his remedy, in the absence of
a bar."



20.	The Karnataka High
Court has, in case of 
Ratnakar Rao U. v. Union of India and others

reported in 2003-II-LLJ-336, observed that, '
Payment of Gratuity
Act,1972
 - 
Sec.2(e)
 - New Mangalore Port Trust (Adaptation of Rules)
Regulations, 1980 - 
Regulation 4
 - Central Civil Services (Pension)
Rues,1972 - Rule 50 - 
Gratuity Act
 not applicable to person governed
by Act or Rule providing for payment of gratuity - 
Regulation 4
 of
Port Trust Regulations made Central Pension Rules applicable to its
employees - Denial of gratuity as per Central Pension Rules therefore
held not proper and payment of balance with interest at 12% ordered."




21.	The Andhra Pradesh
High Court has, in case of 
Life Insurance Corporation of India,
Hyderabad v. Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Hyderabad and
others
 reported in 2000-II-LLJ-1462, in Para.10, observed as under :




"10.	A reference to
the provisions of 
Sections 2(e)
, 
4
, 
5
 and 
14
 leads to an irresistible
conclusion that either 
Section 48(2B)
 of the LIC Act or the LIC Rules
for Class-I Officers do not take away the right of an employee to
claim the benefit under the provisions of the Act. Indeed,
sub-section (5) of 
Section 4
 provides that an employee is entitled to
better terms of gratuity other than the gratuity payable under
sub-section (2) of 
Section 4
 and 
Section 5
 enables the appropriate
Government to exempt any establishment from the operation of the Act
only if the gratuity payable by the LIC is more favourable to the
employees than the benefits under the Act."



Aforesaid
	decision was challenged before Division Bench of this Court by
	Bilimora Nagarpalika by filing Letters Patent Appeal NO. 379 of 2008
	which is reported in 2008(2) GLH 448.  Division Bench of this Court
	decided group of appeals and observed as under in para 5,6 and 7: 



 5.	We
	are unable to accept the contention raised by Ms. Jhaveri. 
Section
	2(f)
 of the Act of 1972 defines  employer.  Sub-clause (ii) of
	the said clause (f) expressly includes the  local authority 
	within the meaning of the word employer. 
Section 4(1)
 of the Act of
	1972 enjoins the employer to pay gratuity to its employee on
	termination of employment after he renders continuous service for
	not less than five years, inter alia,
	on his superannuation or on his retirement. Thus, the Municipality
	is under obligation to pay gratuity to its retired employees in
	accordance with the Act of 1972.



6.	
Section
	5
 of the Act of 1972 empowers the appropriate Government to exempt
	any establishment, etc. to which the Act applies, from the operation
	of the provision of the Act of 1972. In other words, unless an
	establishment is expressly exempted by the appropriate Government by
	notification issued under 
section 5
 of the Act of 1972, such
	establishment  would be liable to pay gratuity to its retired
	employees in accordance with the Act of 1972. It was not the case of
	the Municipality before the controlling authority or before the
	learned Single
	Judge or before us that the Municipality is exempted from the
	operation of the provisions of the Act of 1972 as envisaged by
	
section 5
 of that Act. In absence of the exemption specifically
	granted under 
section 5
, the Municipality is duty bound to pay its
	employees gratuity in accordance with the Act of 1972. 



7.	In
	above view of the matter, the order of the learned Single Judge does
	not warrant interference. The Appeals are dismissed in limine. Civil
	Applications stand disposed of. 



Learned
	Advocate Mr. Munshaw has relied upon decision of apex court in case
	of Beed District Central Coop. Bank Ltd. Verseus State of
	Maharashtra and others, (2006) 8 SCC 514.  Relevant
	para 14 which is relied upon by learned Advocate Mr. Munshaw is
	reproduced as under: 



 14.	Applying
	the `Golden Rule of Interpretation of Statute', to us it appears
	that the question should be considered from the point of view of the
	nature of the scheme as also the fact that the parties agreed to the
	terms thereof. When better terms are offered, a workman takes it as
	a part of the package. He may volunteer therefor, he may not.

	Sub-Section (5)
	of 
Section 4
 of the 1972 Act provides for a right in favour of the
	workman. Such a right may be exercised by the workman concerned. He
	need not necessarily do it. It is the right of individual workman
	and not all the workmen. When the expression "terms" has
	been used, ordinarily it must mean "all the terms of the
	contract". While interpreting even a beneficent statute, like,
	
Payment of Gratuity Act
, we are of the opinion that either contract
	has to be given effect to or the statute. The provisions of the Act
	envisage for one scheme. It could not be segregated. Sub-Section (5)
	of 
Section 4
 of the 1972 Act does not contemplate that the workman
	would be at liberty to opt for better terms of the contract, while
	keeping the option open in respect of a part of the statute.
	While-reserving his right to opt for the beneficent provisions of
	the statute or the agreement,
	he has to opt for either of them and not the best of the terms of
	the statute as well as those of the contract. He cannot have both.
	If such an interpretation is given, the spirit of the Act shall be
	lost. Even in Shin Satellite (supra), this Court stated :



"The
	proper test for deciding validity or otherwise of an agreement or
	order is "substantial severability" and not "textual
	divisibility". It is the duty of the court to sever and
	separate trivial or technical parts by retaining the main or
	substantial part and by giving effect to the atter if it is legal,
	lawful and otherwise enforceable. In such cases, the court must
	consider the question whether the parties could have agreed on the
	valid terms of the agreement had they known that the other terms
	were invalid or unlawful. If the answer to the said question is in
	the affirmative, the doctrine of severability would apply and the
	valid terms of the
	agreement could be enforced, ignoring invalid terms. To hold
	otherwise would be
	 


	
	 


		"to expose the
	covenanter to the almost inevitable risk of litigation which in nine
	cases out of ten he is very ill-able to afford, should he venture to
	act upon his own opinion as to how far the restraint upon him would
	be held by the court to be reasonable, while it may give the
	covenantee the full benefit of unreasonable provisions if the
	covenanter is unable to face litigation."



	Recently,
	this aspect has been examined by apex court in case of Allahabad
	Bank and anotehr versus All India Allahabad Bank Retired Employees
	Association,(2010) 2 SCC 44. Identical question has been
	examined and it has been held that pension and gratuity are two
	separate elements of retirement benefits. Apex court considered same
	aspect of interpretation of statutes, liberal construction  to be
	given having regard to directive principles of 
State Policy and
	Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972
 held to be welfare legislation
	deserving liberal interpretation as discussed in para 13 to 22.
	Therefore, para 13 to 22 are quoted as under: 



 13.
Section
	5
 confers power upon the appropriate Government to exempt any
	establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, plantation etc. from the
	operation of the provisions of the Act, if, in its opinion, the
	employees in such establishment, factory etc. are in receipt   of  
	gratuity    or pensionary benefits   not   less favourable than the
	benefits conferred under the Act. The power to exempt conferred upon
	the appropriate Government  is  not  an unconditional   power. The
	appropriate Government is required to hear all the persons concerned
	who are likely to be affected by the decision to be taken and the
	exemption itself is subject to the conditions mentioned in the
	provisions of the Act namely that employee or class of employees in
	the opinion of the government are in receipt of gratuity or
	pensionary benefits not less favourable than the benefits conferred
	under the Act.



14.	A
	plain reading of the provisions referred to herein  above makes it
	abundantly clear that there is no escape from payment of gratuity
	under the provisions of the Act unless the establishment is granted
	exemption from the operation of
	the provisions of the Act by the appropriate Government.



15.	Notwithstanding
	the subsequent improvements and embellishments the stand taken by
	the bank was and is before us that the members of the Association
	had accepted the Contributory Provident Fund Scheme and they opted
	for pension in lieu of gratuity which was being paid and therefore
	are not entitled to payment of gratuity under the provisions of the
	Act.



16.	We
	shall proceed to examine the point urged by the learned counsel for
	the appellant. Remedial statutes, in contra distinction to penal
	statutes, are known as welfare, beneficient or social justice
	oriented legislations. Such welfare statutes always receive a
	liberal construction. They are required to be so construed so as to
	secure the relief contemplated by the statute. It is well settled
	and needs no restatement at our hands that labour and welfare
	legislation have to be broadly and liberally construed having due
	regard to the Directive Principles of State Policy. 
The Act
 with
	which we are concerned for the present   is   undoubtedly   one  
	such welfare oriented legislation meant to confer certain benefits
	upon the employees working in various establishments in the country.



17.	Krishna
	Iyer, J in 
Som Prakash Rekhi Vs. Union of India1
 stated the
	principle in his inimitable style that benignant provision must
	receive a benignant construction and, even if two interpretations
	are permissible, that which furthers the beneficial object should be
	preferred. It has been further observed: (SCC pp.483-84, para 66)
	 


	 

"We
	live in a welfare State, in a "socialist" republic, under
	a Constitution with profound concern for the weaker classes
	including workers (Part IV). Welfare benefits such as pensions,
	payment of  provident fund and gratuity are in fulfilment of the
	Directive Principles. The payment of gratuity or provident fund
	should not occasion any deduction from the pension
	as a "set-off". Otherwise, the solemn statutory provisions
	ensuring provident fund and gratuity become illusory. Pensions are
	paid out of regard for past meritorious services. The root of
	gratuity and the foundation of provident fund are different. Each
	one is a salutary benefaction statutorily guaranteed independently
	of the other. Even assuming that by private treaty parties had
	otherwise agreed to deductions before the coming into force of these
	beneficial enactments they cannot now be deprivatory. It is
	precisely to guard against such mischief that the non obstante and
	overriding provisions are engrafted on these statutes."




18.	
Interpreting
	the provisions of the said Act this Court in 
Sudhir Chandra Sarkar
	Vs. Tata Iron and Steel Co. Ltd.2
         observed that pension and
	gratuity coupled with contributory provident fund are well
	recognised retiral benefits governed by various statutes. These
	statutes are legislative responses to the developing notions of the
	fair and humane conditions of work, being the promise of Part IV of
	the Constitution. It was observed: (SCC p.380, para 15)

 
	 


	 

"15...the
	fundamental principle underlying gratuity is that it is a retirement
	benefit for long service as a provision for old age. Demands of
	social security and social justice made it necessary to provide for
	payment of gratuity. On the enactment of 
Payment of Gratuity Act,
	1972
 a statutory liability was cast on the employer to pay
	gratuity."




19.	Gratuity
	payable to an employee on the termination of his employment after
	rendering continuous service for not less than 5 years and on
	superannuation or retirement or resignation etc. being a statutory
	right cannot be taken away except in accordance with the provisions
	of the Act whereunder an exemption from such payment may be granted
	only by the appropriate Government under 
Section 5
 of the Act which
	itself is a conditional power. No exemption could be granted by any
	Government unless it is established that the employees are in
	receipt of gratuity or pension benefits which are more favourable
	than the benefits conferred under the Act. 



20.	
In
	 
Union of India  Vs All India Services Pensioners' Association And
	Another3
,  this    Court explained that there is always a
	distinction between the pension payable on retirement and the
	gratuity payable on retirement.




	"8.	While pension is payable
	periodically as long as the pensioner is alive, gratuity is
	ordinarily paid only once on retirement." 



21.	No
	decision of this Court which  has taken a view contrary to the
	decisions referred to herein above has been brought to our notice. 



22.	In
	our considered opinion pensionary benefits or the retirement
	benefits as the case may be whether governed by a Scheme or Rules
	may be a package consisting of payment of pension and as well as
	gratuity. Pensionary benefits may include payment of pension as well
	as gratuity. One does not exclude the other. Only in cases where the
	gratuity component in such pension schemes is in better terms in
	comparison to that of what an employee may   get under   the  
	
Payment   of   Gratuity   Act
   the government may grant an
	exemption and relieve the employer from the statutory obligation of
	payment of gratuity.  



In
	view of aforesaid decision of apex court and considering contentions
	raised by learned Advocate Mr. Munshaw, according to my opinion,
	such contentions cannot be accepted by this court because there is
	no exemption given to petitioner establishment by appropriate
	Government from operation of 
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972
 and
	respondent no.1 is an employee as defined under 
section 2(e)
 of said
	Act. There is no dispute raised by petitioner before controlling
	authority or appellate authority or before this court about
	applicability of said Act and pension and gratuity both are separate
	and independent scheme for retirement benefits and it cannot be
	considered to be one package policy as contended by learned Advocate
	Mr. Munshaw and, therefore, in view of that, contentions raised by
	learned Advocate Mr. Munshaw are rejected. View taken by controlling
	authority and appellate authority is perfectly justified  and
	therefore, this petition does not call for any interference in
	exercising power under 
Article 227
 of Constitution of India by this
	court. Therefore, according to my opinion, there is no substance in
	this petition and same is therefore dismissed. 



It
	is directed to controlling authority concerned to pay amount
	deposited by petitioner at the time of filing of an appeal before
	Appellate Authority by way of account payee cheque in name of
	Natvarlal Jagjivan Madia after proper verification, immediately and
	without any delay. 



(H.K.Rathod,J.)
 

 


 

Vyas

    

 
	   
      
      
	    
		      
	   
      
	  	    

		   Top



