



[Cites 
21
, Cited by 
0
]




Kerala High Court


Dr.K.Mohankumar vs Harikuttan Unnithan.C on 1 July, 2011


Author: 
P.R.Ramachandra Menon


Bench: 
P.R.Ramachandra Menon


       

  

  

 
 
                   IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

                                                PRESENT:

       THE HON'BLE ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE MRS.MANJULA CHELLUR
                                                      &
         THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.R.RAMACHANDRA MENON

      WEDNESDAY, THE 8TH DAY OF AUGUST 2012/17TH SRAVANA 1934

                                       WA.No. 975 of 2011 ( )
                                            ----------------------
   AGAINST THE ORDER/JUDGMENT IN WPC.NO.15405/09 DATED 01-07-2011
                                            ..........

    APPELLANT(S)/RESPONDENTS 2 TO 4:
    ---------------------------------------------------------

    1. DR.K.MOHANKUMAR, PRINCIPAL, D.B.COLLEGE,
       SASTHAMCOTTA.

    2. SRI.D.RAJAMOHAN, PRINCIPAL,
        D.B.COLLEGE, PARUMALA.

    3. DR.B.RADHAKRISHNAPILLA, PRINCIPAL,
        D.B.COLLEGE, THALAYOLAPARAMBU.

       BY ADVS.SRI.K.JAJU BABU
                    SMT.M.U.VIJAYALAKSHMI
                    SRI.BRIJESH MOHAN
                    SMT.DHANYA CHANDRAN
                    SRI.T.S.SHYAM PRASANTH

    RESPONDENT(S)/PETITIONER, RESPONDENTS 1, 5 - 7 & 9 -10:
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1. HARIKUTTAN UNNITHAN.C., READER IN PHYSICS,
       D.B.COLLEGE, SASTHAMCOTTA,KOLLAM - 690 521.

    2. THE TRAVANCORE DEVASWOM BOARD, REPRESENTED BY
       ITS SECRETARY, T.D.B. OFFICE, NANTHANCODE,
       THIRUVANANTHAPURAM - 695 003.

    3. THE UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION (UGC),
        BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG, NEW DELHI- 110 002,
        REPRESENTED BY ITS SECRETARY.
Kss                                                                                            ..2/-

                                  ..2....

WA.NO.975/2011




    4. THE UNIVERSITY OF KERALA,
       REPRESENTED BY ITS REGISTRAR, UNIVERSITY OFFICE,
       THIRUVANANTHAPURAM - 695 001.

    5. THE MAHATMA GANDHI UNIVERSITY,
       REPRESENTED BY ITS REGISTRAR, UNIVERSITY OFFICE,
       KOTTAYAM - 686 560.

    6. SHRI.P.NARAYANAN, FORMER MEMBER,
       TRAVANCORE DEVASWOM BOARD, T.D.B.OFFICE, NANTHANCODE,
       THIRUVANANTHAPURAM - 695 003.

    7. SMT.T.K.SUMATHIKUTTY AMMA,
       FORMER MEMBER, TRAVANCORE DEVASWOM BOARD,
       T.D.B.OFFICE, NANTHANCODE, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM - 695 003.

    *ADDL.R8 TO R12 IMPLEADED:

    R8.    DR.S.SIVAKUMAR, SELECTION GRADE LECTURER
           IN CHEMISTRY, DEVASWOM BOARD COLLEGE,
           THALAYOLAPARAMBU P.O.

    R9.    DR. K.SUJATHA, SELECTION GRADE LECTURER IN ENGLISH,
           DEVASWOM BOARD PAMPA COLLEGE, PARUMALA PO,
           MANNAR, PATHANAMTHITTA - 689 626.

    R10.   R.JAYACHANDRAN, SELECTION GRADE LECTURER IN CHEMISTRY,
           DEVASWOM BOARD COLLEGE, SASTHAMCOTTA - 690 521.

    R11.   K.G.SURESH, SELECTION GRADE LECTURER IN CHEMISTRY,
           DEVASWOM BOARD PAMPA COLLEGE, PARUMALA PO,
           MANNAR, PATHANAMTHITTA DISTRICT.

    (*ADDL.R8 TO R11 ARE IMPLEADED AS PER ORDER DATED 9/08/2011 IN
                                          I.A.NO.548/11)


Kss                                                   ..3/-

                                       ..3....

W.A.NO.975/2011




     R12.   K.P.BALACHANDRAN,
            S/O.K.P. THAMPI,
            RESIDING AT SOORYA,
            MATHIL BHAGOM, THIRUVALLA,
            NOW WORKING AS SELECTION GRADE LECTURER AT
            DEVASWOM BOARD, PAMPA COLLEGE,
            PARUMALA.

     (*ADDL.R12 IS IMPLEADED AS PER ORDER DATED 16/11/2011 IN
                  I.A.NO.844/2011)


        R2 BY ADV. SRI.G.BIJU,SC,TRAVANCORE DEVASWOM BOARD
        R3 BY ADV. SRI.S.KRISHNAMOORTHY, CGC
        R4 BY ADV. SRI.M.RAJAGOPALAN NAIR, SC, KERALA UTY.
           BY ADV. SRI.GEORGE POONTHOTTAM,SC,KERALA UTY.
           BY DR.S.GOPAKUMARAN NAIR, SENIOR ADVOCATE
           BY ADV. SRI.M.CHANDRA BOSE
           BY ADV. SRI.A.RAJASIMHAN
       R5 BY ADV. SRI. T.A. SHAJI, SC, M.G.UNIVERSITY
       R8 TO R11 BY ADV. SR
I.P.C
.SASIDHARAN
              R12 BY ADV. SRI.K.B.PRADEEP




      THIS WRIT APPEAL HAVING BEEN FINALLY HEARD ON 01/03/2012
      ALONG WITH CRP. 138/2011 AND CRP. 139/2011, THE COURT ON
      08/08/2012 DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:




Kss



Manjula Chellur, Ag. C.J. & P.R.Ramachandra Menon, J.
         - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                     W.A. No. 975 OF 2011
                                  and
                 C.R.P. Nos.138 & 139 of 2011
         - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
            Dated this the 8th day of August, 2012

                            JUDGMENT



Manjula Chellur, Ag. C.J.



          So far as W.A. No.975 of 2011 is concerned, it is

against the judgment of the learned Single Judge dated

01.07.2011 in W.P.(C) No.15405 of 2009. The appellants were

respondents 2 to 4 before the learned Single Judge. Aggrieved

by the judgment of the learned Single Judge, they have

approached the Division Bench in the above appeal.


          2.    CRP Nos.138 and 139 of 2011 are filed by

Dr.S.Sivakumar and others challenging the order dated

11.11.2010    of     the     Mahatma        Gandhi       University(M.G.

University), Appellate Tribunal. Before the University Appellate

Tribunal one K.P.Balachandran was the appellant in appeal

No.7 of 2009, Dr.P.P.Chandrasekhara Pillai was the appellant in

appeal No.8 of 2009 and Dr.S.Sivakumar and four others were

the appellants in appeal No.9 of 2009. These appeals were

WA No. 975 of 2011 and
C.R.P. Nos. 138 & 139 of 2011

                                 -:2:-



filed before M.G. University Appellate Tribunal. But the appellant

in appeal No.9 of 2009 had filed another appeal, appeal No.2 of

2010 before the Kerala University Appellate Tribunal challenging

the appointment of one Dr.K.Mohnakumar to the post of Principal

of D.B. College, Sasthamcottah which is affiliated to Kerala

University. The three appeals filed before the M.G. University,

Appellate Tribunal pertain to the decision of the M.G. University

in respect of the appointments of Dr.D.Radhakrishna Pillai and

Mr.D.Rajmohan as Principals of Devaswom Board Colleges(DB

Colleges) at different places. All the three matters are taken up

together as the controversial issue is with regard to the

appointment of Principals to Colleges affiliated to Kerala

University and M.G. University coming under the management of

Travancore Devaswom Board (for short TDB). The facts that lead

to the filing of the appeal are as under.



            3. Dr.K.Mohankumar the 2nd respondent before the

learned Single Judge was appointed as Principal of D.B. College,

Sasthamcotta and one Mr.D.Rajmohan was appointed as Principal

of D.B. College, Parumala and Dr.D. Radhakrishna Pillai was

WA No. 975 of 2011 and
C.R.P. Nos. 138 & 139 of 2011

                                -:3:-



appointed as Principal of D.B. College, Thalayolaparambu.        A

notification came to be issued on behalf of the Travancore

Devaswom Board declaring the decision of the Board to draw a

selection list in order to 'promote qualified teachers' to the post

of Principal of the above said three Colleges after securing

willingness and other details from various teachers and lecturers.


            4. It is not in dispute that the 1st respondent herein

who was the writ petitioner and various others, in all about 17

persons, forwarded their willingness along with the bio-data.

Interviews were conducted between 21.04.2009 and 28.04.2009

by the so called selection committee presided over by the

President and other members of the Board including the Principal

of one Devaswom Board College and a principal of an unaided

College. They were respondents before the learned Single Judge.

Subsequently, the present appellant along with Mr.D.Rajmohan

and Dr.D. Radhakrishna Pillai were appointed as principals of the

above three Colleges of Travancore Devaswom Board. Aggrieved

by the same, the writ petitioner/1st respondent approached the

learned Single Judge on the following three grounds. 1)

WA No. 975 of 2011 and
C.R.P. Nos. 138 & 139 of 2011

                                 -:4:-



Constitution of selection committee was wrong, as the selection

committee was required only in the case of appointment of

Principal by 'direct recruitment'.    2) Mr.Rajmohan       who was

appointed as Principal is junior to the writ petitioner- Harikuttan

Unnithan and 3) the writ petitioner- Harikuttan Unnithan was

entitled for selection on the basis of seniority-cum-fitness.

According to the writ petitioner, the approval of the selection and

appointment of the principals was sought from Kerala University

and M.G. University and the matters are still pending.


 
5.    The learned Single Judge after referring to the

arguments of both the parties proceeded to opine that the

common selection process made in respect of different Colleges

under different Universities by interlinking two Universities was

in-correct and the fundamental flaw in the entire proceedings

vitiates the whole proceedings. The impugned orders at Ext.P4,

P5 and P13 were quashed directing the 1st respondent Board to

appoint the Principals in terms of the provisions of respective

University Acts so also in the light of the principle laid down by a

Full   Bench     of   this Court in 
Suresh v. Manager, S.N.M.

WA No.
 975 of 2011 and
C.R.P. Nos. 138 & 139 of 2011

                                -:5:-



College [2003 (3) KLT 839] wherein their lordships held; how

seniority-cum-fitness criterion has to be decided. However, the

respondents i.e. the present appellant and two other appointees

as Principals were continued to work as Principals in-charge till

the completion of the process of selection.




            6. So far as the revision petitions, as already stated

above, the challenge was with regard to the promotions and

postings of three teachers working under the Colleges run by the

Corporate management of Travancore Devaswom Board, where

technical controversy was raised in the appeals by filing

interlocutory applications challenging the maintainability of the

appeals itself. The challenge was, the impugned order of TDB

promoting and posting the aforesaid three persons as Principals

of the respective Colleges was not being so far approved by the

concerned University, i.e. the M.G. University as well as the

Kerala University, therefore appeals were not maintainable.


            7.   According to the averments in the Interlocutory

Application, till the approval of the appointment made by the

Management is considered by respective Universities, no appeal

WA No. 975 of 2011 and
C.R.P. Nos. 138 & 139 of 2011

                                -:6:-



under the respective Act could be filed. By referring to an earlier

judgment of the High Court in Mother Anasthesia v.

University Appellate Tribunal [1980 KLT 666] and Suresh v.

Manager, S.N.M. College(supra) the Tribunal ultimately opined

that the appeals deserve to be dismissed as not maintainable and

liberty was reserved to the appellants to approach the Tribunal

again, once the approval of University is granted. Aggrieved by

the orders of the University Appellate Tribunals, these two

revision petitions are filed.



            8. The entire question revolves round the authority of

the Devaswom Board to constitute a 'selection committee' so far

as appointment of Principals to the three vacancies at three

different Colleges as stated above by promotion and not by direct

recruitment. Other relevant controversy before us is with regard

to the criterion for selection and lack of qualification of

respondents who were appointed as Principals.       All the three

respondents were teachers promoted as Principals and their

appointment orders are set aside.



 
9. The learned counsel appearing for the appellants

WA No. 975 of 2011 and
C.R.P. Nos. 138 & 139 of 2011

                                 -:7:-



Mr.Jaju Babu contended that Colleges are situated within the

jurisdiction of Kerala University as well as M.G. University.

Therefore by referring to the definition of 'College' under the


Kerala University Act
 contends that it would mean only an

institution affiliated to the University and the appointments will

be with reference to the Act. This argument was made so far as

the appointment of one of the appellants who is working in a

College under the M.G. University.        According to the learned

counsel for the appellants, seniority-cum-merit has to be the

criterion and there cannot be segregation of the members in

respect of different Colleges.        According to them, common

selection committee was necessary only for the purpose of

appointment of a Principal by direct recruitment. According to

them, seniority-cum-merit (seniority-cum-fitness) has been

explained in the case of 
RajendraKumar Srivastava v. Samyut

Kshetriya Gramin Bank
 [(2010) 1 SCC 335].
 
So also they rely

on decision in 
Rupa Rani Rakshit v. Jharkhand Gramin Bank


[(2010) 1 SCC 345] which governs the merits of the present case

as the Apex Court in the above said two decisions had clearly

WA No. 975 of 2011 and
C.R.P. Nos.
 
138 & 139 of 2011

                                -:8:-



stated how seniority-cum-merit or seniority-cum-fitness governs

the process whereby eligible candidates in possession of

minimum necessary merit in the feeder category could be first

ascertained and for ascertaining the same, a written test or

interview is permissible and according to him, the learned Judge

was not justified in placing reliance in the case of 
Suresh v.

Manager, S.N.M. College
(supra).




 
10. The judgment of the learned Single Judge,

according to the learned counsel for the appellants, cannot be

sustained in view of the law 
laid down by
 the Apex Court in the

above two decisions. According to them, in the absence of the

writ petitioner not challenging the notification and having

participated in the interview pursuant to Ext.P3, cannot turn

around when it is learnt that he was not successful in the

interview conducted by the selection committee. According to

the appellants, the procedure followed for selection to the post of

Principals was correct. The further contention of the appellants is

that in view of the pendency of CRP Nos.138 and 139 of 2011,

the learned Single Judge ought not to have interfered with the

WA No. 975 of 2011 and
C.R.P. Nos. 138 & 139 of 2011

                                -:9:-



selection.
 
With these averments, placing reliance on 
Suresh v.

Manager, S.N.M. College
 [2003 (
3) KLT 839], Haryana State

Warehousing Corporation & others v. Jagat Ram and

another
 [(
2011) 3 SCC 422], Valsala Kumari Devi v.

Director, Higher Secondary Education
 [2007(4) KLT 494

(SC)], Siraj v. High Court of 
Kerala [2006(2) KLT 923], Rupa

Rani Rakshit v. Jharkhand Gramin Bank
 [(
2010) 1 SCC 345]

and Rajendra Kumar Srivastava v. Samyut Kshetriya

Gramin Bank
 [(2010) 1 SCC 335] the learned counsel appearing

for the appellants has sought for setting aside the judgment of

the learned Single Judge by allowing the appeal and also the

revision petitions.




            11.     As against this, the learned Senior counsel

Dr.S.Gopakumaran Nair arguing for the writ petitioner/1st

respondent contends that having regard to 
Section 57
 of Kerala

University Act and also Section 59 of M.G. University Act, the

appointment of teachers in private Colleges as Principals, though

contemplates two methods of recruitment, i.e. direct recruitment

and by promotion, whenever it is made by promotion, the

WA No. 975 of 2011 and
C.R.P. Nos. 138 & 139 of 2011

                                -:10:-



authority concerned is required to consider the appointment on

the basis of seniority-cum-fitness. He further contends, when the

process of selection is by promotion, there was no necessity for

selection committee to be constituted to consider the candidates

for promotion to the post of Principals which were vacant in

Colleges    of  Devaswom Board        affiliated to two  different

Universities.    Therefore, according to him, the learned Single

Judge was justified in quashing the appointment orders and in

the light of appointment orders being set aside, question of

considering Revision Petitions would not arise.     Therefore the

Revision Petitions become infructuous.



            12. We have gone through the various provisions of


Kerala University Act
 as well as the M.G. University Act. So far

as the appointment of        Mr.Dr.K.Mohankumar to the post of

Principal at Sasthamcotta, it comes under the Kerala University

and the procedure applicable is with reference to the Act

governing Kerala University.      So far as other two appellants,

Dr.D.Rajmohan and Dr.D.Radhakrishna Pillai, they come under

M.G. University. It is not in dispute that all three Colleges are

WA No. 975 of 2011 and
C.R.P. Nos. 138 & 139 of 2011

                                  -:11:-



run by the management of TDB.             
Section 57(2)
 of Kerala

University Act provides the procedure for appointment of

Principals made by educational agency by promotion from among

the teachers of the College or of all the Colleges as the case may

be are by direct recruitment which means appointments can be

made either by promotion or by direct recruitment. 
Section 57

(3)
 of the Kerala University Act provides, the criterion that

whenever recruitment is made by promotion, it should be on

seniority-cum-fitness. A selection committee is required only if

the post of teachers and Principals are filled up by direct

recruitment.        This     statement   of writ   petitioner  was

uncontroverted in many ways before the learned Single Judge as

the affidavit filed on behalf of the appointed Principals

categorically indicates, whether it was under Kerala University or

under M.G. University, constitution of selection committee was

necessary only for the purpose of appointing a Principal by direct

recruitment.     Therefore, there is no dispute that a selection

committee was not at all contemplated when the selection

process is by way of promotion. Similar to 
Section 57
 of Kerala

WA No. 975 of 2011 and
C.R.P. Nos. 138 & 139 of 2011

                                 -:12:-



University Act, M.G. University Act also has relevant provision at


Section 59
.       Sub-
section 2
 and 
3
 of 
Section 57
 of Kerala

University Act are pari materia so far as Sub-
section 2
 and 
3
 of

Section 59 of M.G.University Act.        Therefore, the post of

Principal, if filed up by promotion either under 
Kerala University

Act
 or M.G. University Act, there is no mandate or requirement

for constitution of a selection committee.



            13. In the present case, not only a common selection

committee was constituted for the purpose of promotion to the

post of Principal under different Colleges of two Universities but,

a common selection list was also prepared by the selection

committee. In that view of the matter, the learned Single Judge

was justified in saying that the process of selection adopted by

the management was not justified.



 
14. Lengthy arguments were addressed on the locus

standi of the writ petitioner and also what exactly 'seniority-cum-

fitness' would mean. The case in 
Siraj v. High
 Court of Kerala

[2006(2) KLT 923(SC)] before High Court was with regard to

prescription of minimum marks for the oral examination as a

WA No. 975 of 2011 and
C.R.P. Nos. 138 & 139 of 2011

                                 -:13:-



condition of eligibility for selection as Munsiff Magistrate. It was

held by the Apex Court that the appellant/writ petitioner was not

entitled to any relief under 
Article 226
 of the Constitution of India

for more than one reason.         First and foremost was, he has

participated in the written test and oral test without raising any

objection in spite of being aware of the prescription that

minimum marks has to be secured both in the written test and

also in the oral test. Apart from this, they were also aware of the

decision on the judicial side before the High Court. Therefore,

their Lordships held that having participated in the interview it

was not open for them to turn around thereafter when they failed

at the interview to contend that a provision of minimum mark for

the interview was not proper.




            15. In the case of Rupa Rani Rakshit [(2010) 1 SCC

345] apart from referring to what exactly merit-cum-seniority

and seniority-cum-merit would mean their Lordships held length

of service rendered by virtue of wrong appointment/promotion

which was subsequently set aside cannot be added to the length

of service for counting seniority. The main emphasis in this case

WA No. 975 of 2011 and
C.R.P. Nos. 138 & 139 of 2011

                                 -:14:-



is with regard to the criterion of seniority-cum-merit so also what

would constitute merit-cum-seniority. In the present case the

challenge is only with regard to the qualification of the candidates

who were selected. But with regard to constitution of selection

committee, no such provision is made in the enactment.


            16. As already stated above, it is the contention of

the appellants/respondents before the learned Single Judge that

constitution of selection committee is mandatory for selection to

the post of Principal by direct recruitment.    A common selection

list was prepared by clubbing the teachers working under

different Colleges affiliated to different Universities. Therefore, if

the very selection process is defective, the defence of the

appellant that having participated in the interview, he cannot

question the selection process falls to ground. If the selection

process itself is defective, neither the appellant nor respondents

can take benefit out of it. From such defective selection process,

no legal or authoritatively selected candidate can come through.

Therefore this argument of the learned counsel for the appellants

cannot be accepted.



WA No. 975 of 2011 and
C.R.P. Nos. 138 & 139 of 2011

                                     -:15:-


            17. Then coming to the argument addressed on what

is seniority-cum-fitness, according to the learned counsel for the

appellants, seniority-cum-fitness is nothing but seniority-cum-

merit.    He relies upon as already stated above, on various

decisions.    
In the case of 
Suresh v. Manager, S.N.M. College


(supra), it was a promotion to the post of Principal on the basis

of seniority-cum-fitness. It was held in this case as under:


              "Seniority-cum-fitness postulates promotion on the basis of

       seniority subject to rejection of the unfit.   It does not permit

       selection. Such a rule is calculated to avoid heart burning. It

       avoids controversy. It limits discretion. It excludes arbitrariness.

       In the existing situation, it is reasonable.       So far as the

       appointment by promotion is concerned, the provision has been

       made in
 S. 59(3)
.     It has been specifically provided that "the

       educational agency shall make the appointment on the basis of

       seniority-cum-fitness". These words of the Act have to be given

       their plain and natural meaning. The provision is couched in a

       mandatory language.      The use of the word `shall' makes it

       imperative for the management to follow the prescribed criteria.

       In the context, the word `shall' cannot be interpreted to mean

       `may', for, that would lead to an anomalous situation.          The

       Legislature appears to have clearly intended that the discretion of

       the management should be restricted. The senior person should

       be promoted unless he is found to be unfit for the post of the

       Principal.  It is true that the post of Principal of a College is

WA No. 975 of 2011 and
C.R.P. Nos. 138 & 139 of 2011

                                   -:16:-



       pivotal.    A bad teacher may not be able to administer an

       institution.  However, the management has been given the

       discretion to supersede a senior person, if he is found unfit. This

       discretion can be exercised by the management on the basis of

       good reasons. Since the Act provides for the remedy of appeal

       before an Appellate Tribunal against an order of supersession, it

       would be incumbent on the management to give reasons for the

       supersession of a senior person. The reasons cannot be fanciful

       or imaginary. These must have a nexus with the fitness of the

       candidate for the post and should be founded on tangible

       material."



 
18. Another decision relied on by the counsel is


Haryana State Warehousing Corporation and others v.

Jagat Ram and another
 [(2011) 3 SCC 422]. In this case their

Lordships held that in the case of seniority-cum-merit criterion

what is required is a minimum necessary merit, but does not

require comparative assessment of merit.                    Therefore, their

Lordships held that the promotion given to a junior in preference

to the senior is only on the ground that junior is more meritorious

would violate seniority-cum-merit criterion. Their Lordships have

held at paragraph 45 in detail what it would mean which reads as

under:




WA No. 975 of 2011 and
C.R.P. Nos. 138 & 139 of 2011

                                      -:17:-



              "45. Thus it is the settled position that the criterion of

       seniority-cum-merit is different from the criterion of merit and also

       the criterion of merit-cum-seniority. Where the promotion is based

       on seniority-cum-merit, the officer cannot claim promotion as a

       matter of right by virtue of his seniority alone. If    he is found

       unfit to discharge the duties of the higher post, he may be passed

       over and an officer junior to him may be promoted. Seniority-cum-


       merit means that, given the minimum necessary merit required for

       efficiency of administration, the senior, though less meritorious,

       shall have priority in the matter of promotion and there is no

       question of further comparative assessment of the merit of those

       who were found to have the minimum necessary merit required

       for efficiency of administration. For assessing the minimum

       necessary merit, the competent authority can lay down the

       minimum standard that is required and also prescribe the mode of

       assessment of merit of the employees. Such assessment can be

       made by assigning marks on the basis of appraisal of

       performance on the basis of service record and interview and

       prescribing the minimum marks which would entitle a person to be

       considered for promotion on the basis of seniority-cum-merit."


             19. 
In the case of 
Valsala Kumari Devi v. Director,

Higher Secondary Education
 [2007(4) KLT 494(SC)] the

appointment to the post of Higher Secondary School teacher was

with a condition 'subject to seniority and suitability'.                    Their

Lordships held that such expression occurring in the Government

Order does not mean the comparative assessment of suitability

WA No. 975 of 2011 and
C.R.P. Nos. 138 & 139 of 2011

                                      -:18:-



and it only means the suitability for the particular post and the

suitability is related to the prescribed qualification and requisite

experience. The relevant paragraphs are 12, 13 and 14 which

read as under:




              "12. Government Order dated 27.6.1990 makes it clear

       that the selection of teachers will be subject to seniority and

       suitability and G.O. dated 13.5.1998 specifically prescribes that

       the teachers appointed from General Education Subordinate

       Service will be treated as appointment by promotion. As stated

       earlier, the selection will be subject to seniority and suitability

       and there is no dispute that the appellant is senior to 5th

       respondent. She is eligible and qualified for appointment by

       promotion to HSST. It is not the case of the Management that

       she is unsuitable for promotion.



              13.     The expression "subject to seniority and suitability"


       occurring in G.O. dated 27.6.1990 does not mean the

       comparative assessment of suitability and it only means the

       suitability for the particular post and the suitability is related to

       the prescribed qualification and requisite experience. 
In view of

       the distinction between the appointment by promotion from

       General Education Subordinate Service and an appointment to

       the 75% vacancies ear-marked for direct recruitment, we are of

       the view that the finding arrived at by the Director, Higher

       Secondary School, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala that seniority is

       not the criterion for 'appointment by promotion to HSST' is

       erroneous and is not in terms of the Government Orders 
referred

       to above
. Though in the order, it is stated that the 5th

WA No. 975 of 2011 and
C.R.P. Nos. 138 & 139 of 2011

                                     -:19:-



       respondent is more suitable than the appellant, as rightly pointed

       out by learned counsel appearing for the appellant,it has not

       been shown or indicated the reasons or grounds for arriving at

       such decision that the 5th respondent was found more suitable

       than the appellant for the post. We are also in agreement with

       the contention that the Director has mechanically accepted the

       decision of the Selection Committee that the 5th respondent is

       more suitable than the appellant without reference to selection

       for appointment by promotion to HSST against 25% quota

       earmarked for qualified High School Assistants. We are of the

       view that the Director has committed an illegality in upholding the

       selection of the 5th respondent for appointment to the post of

       HSST. Further the 5th respondent has been preferred to the

       appellant for the reason that his main subject in B.A. is History

       which is totally irrelevant for promotion to HSST from among

       HSAs. In G.O. dated 27.6.1990 the qualification prescribed is a

       second class Master's Degree in the concerned subject with

       B.Ed. It is relevant to point out that the appellant and the 5th

       respondent have obtained M.A. Degree from Mysore University

       and the 5th respondent took B.Ed with Social Studies. The other

       reason given by the Selection Committee for preferring 5th

       respondent is that he has proficiency in English, Kannada and

       Malayalam whereas the appellant has proficiency in English and

       Malayalam. As rightly pointed out by learned counsel appearing

       for the appellant, once the requirement of the prescribed

       qualification is satisfied, the selection must be made on the

       basis of the seniority and suitability and there is no scope for

       making comparison of qualifications or comparative assessment

       of suitability. The expression 'suitability' means that a person to

WA No. 975 of 2011 and
C.R.P. Nos. 138 & 139 of 2011

                                      -:20:-



       be appointed shall be legally eligible and 'eligible' should be

       taken to mean 'fit to be chosen'.




                     14. In such circumstances, we are of the view that

       it was improper on the part of the Selection Committee to make

       selection taking into account the qualifications which are not

       prescribed in the G.Os and by giving weightage to such

       qualifications. The Selection Committee has also taken note of

       the suggestion of the Parents Teachers Association that persons

       having proficiency in Kannada should be preferred when there is

       no such condition in the Government Order. In other words,

       preference is to be given for proficiency in Kannada which is not

       a requisite qualification. In our view, ignoring the appellant who

       has been working as HSA in the very same school and selecting

       the 5th respondent by giving weightage for proficiency in

       Kannada which is not a condition prescribed in the relevant

       Govt. orders by the Selection Committee can not be sustained. It

       is based on extraneous/irrelevant considerations."





            20. 
In the case of               
Rupa Rani Rakshit
 (supra)

paragraphs 2, 7 and 8 are relevant.                Their Lordships have in

detail referred to merit-cum-seniority and seniority-cum-merit in

the above said paragraphs.
 
In the case of         
RajendraKumar

Srivastava v. Samyut Kshetriya Gramin Bank
(supra) paragraphs

2 to 4 and 8 to 12 are relevant which read as under:


                    "2. By Notification dated 28-9-1988, the Central

WA No. 975 of 2011 and
C.R.P. Nos. 138 & 139 of 2011

                                      -:21:-



       Government in exercise of powers conferred under 
Section 17


       read with 
Section 29
 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976

       framed the Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and Promotion of

       Officers and Other Employees) Rules, 1988 ("the Rules", for

       short). Rule 5 of the Rules provided that all vacancies should be

       filled up by deputation, promotion or direct recruitment, in

       accordance with provisions contained in the Second Schedule to

       the Rules. Entry 7 in the Second Schedule related to recruitment

       to the posts of Area Manager or Senior Manager (in Scale II). It

       provided that all the posts of Area Manager and Senior Manager

       should be filled by promotion from among the confirmed officers

       (in Scale I) working in the Bank on the basis of seniority-cum-


       merit. It prescribed the educational qualification (graduate) and

       minimum period of service in the feeder cadre (eight years as an

       officer in the Regional Rural Bank concerned). It also prescribed

       the mode of selection by promotion as "interview and assessment

       of performance reports for the preceding three years period as

       officers". Sub-rule (4) of Rule 10 provided that the Staff Selection

       Committee shall follow the procedure determined by the Board for

       selecting candidates for appointment or promotion, in accordance

       with the guidelines issued by the Central Government from time to

       time.



       3. At the 131st meeting of the Board of Directors of the first

       respondent Bank held on 29-11-1996, the following procedure for

       promotion of officers from Scale I to Scale II was approved:


       "After considering the guidelines contained in the Government of

       India's Letter dated 23-9-1988 and Letter No. 823 dated 7-10-

       1996 of National Bank, the Board passed a resolution that sixty

       points be earmarked on the basis of work done during the

WA No. 975 of 2011 and
C.R.P. Nos. 138 & 139 of 2011

                                       -:22:-



       previous three years in the selection procedure for promotion on

       the Scale II posts and forty points be given for interview and in

       this manner the promotion procedure should be completed. Also,

       an information in this behalf be given to National Bank."


       In pursuance of the above, the eligible candidates (Scale I

       officers),  including    the   appellants   were    considered      and

       interviewed on 16-12-1996 and 17-12-1996 and a select list was

       published on 20-12-1996 promoting 64 officers (Respondents 4 to


       67) from Scale I to Scale II with effect from 20-12-1996.


       4. Appellants 1 to 7 were not selected. Many who were selected,

       were their juniors. The appellants allege that their service and

       conduct were good and there were no adverse entries against

       them and therefore, they ought to have been promoted from

       officer Scale I to Scale II. They therefore filed a writ petition before

       the Allahabad High Court (WP No. 3151 of 1997), for quashing

       the entire promotion process of the first respondent Bank from

       Scale I to Scale II culminating in the order dated 20-12-1996 and

       for a direction to the first respondent Bank to undertake the

       promotion process afresh. The appellants also sought quashing of

       the resolution of the Board of Directors dated 29-11-1996

       prescribing the promotion procedure.



                     xx             xx            xx             xx


              8. On the contentions urged, the following two questions

       arise for our consideration:



       (i) Whether minimum qualifying marks could be prescribed for

       assessment of past performance and interview, where the

       promotions are to be made on the principle of seniority-cum-


       merit?



       (ii) Whether the first respondent Bank was justified in fixing a high

WA No. 975 of 2011 and
C.R.P. Nos. 138 & 139 of 2011

                                       -:23:-



       percentage (78%) as the minimum qualifying marks (minimum

       merit) for promotion?



       Re: Question (i)


       9. 
In 
State of Kerala v. N.M. Thomas3
, a seven-Judge Bench of

       this Court defined the concept of "seniority-cum-merit". This Court

       held that: (SCC p. 335, para 38)

       "38. ... `Seniority-cum-merit' means that given the minimum

       necessary merit requisite for efficiency of administration, the

       senior though the less meritorious shall have priority."


       10. 
In 
Union of India v. Lt. Gen. Rajendra Singh Kadyan4
 this

       Court    observed     that   "seniority-cum-merit"   postulates  the

       requirement of certain minimum merit or satisfying a benchmark

       previously fixed, and subject to fulfilling the said requirement, the

       promotion is based on seniority. It was pointed out that

       requirement of assessment of comparative merit was absent in

       the case of "seniority-cum-merit".




       11. It is also well settled that the principle of seniority-cum-merit,

       for promotion, is different from the principle of "seniority" and the

       principle of "merit-cum-seniority". Where promotion is on the basis

       of seniority alone, merit will not play any part at all. But where

       promotion is on the principle of seniority-cum-merit, promotion is

       not automatic with reference to seniority alone. Merit will also play

       a significant role. The standard method of seniority-cum-merit is to

       subject all the eligible candidates in the feeder              grade

       (possessing the prescribed educational qualification and period of

       service) to a process of assessment of a specified minimum

       necessary merit and then promote the candidates who are found

       to possess the minimum necessary merit strictly in the order of

       seniority. The minimum merit necessary for the post may be

WA No. 975 of 2011 and
C.R.P. Nos. 138 & 139 of 2011

                                       -:24:-



       assessed either by subjecting the candidates to a written

       examination or an interview or by assessment of their work

       performance during the previous years, or by a combination of

       either two or all the three of the aforesaid methods. There is no

       hard-and-fast rule as to how the minimum merit is to be

       ascertained. So long as the ultimate promotions are based on

       seniority, any process for ascertaining the minimum necessary

       merit, as a basic requirement, will not militate against the principle

       of seniority-cum-merit.



       12. In Sivaiah1, a three-Judge Bench of this Court held that while

       the principle of seniority-cum-merit laid greater emphasis on

       seniority, the principle of merit-cum-seniority laid greater

       emphasis on merit and ability, with seniority playing a less

       significant role. This Court held: (SCC p. 730, para 18)

       "18. We thus arrive at the conclusion that the criterion of
       `seniority-cum-merit' in the matter of promotion postulates that
       given the minimum necessary merit requisite for efficiency of
       administration, the senior, even though less meritorious, shall
       have priority and a comparative assessment of merit is not
       required to be made. For assessing the minimum necessary
       merit, the competent authority can lay down the minimum
       standard that is required and also prescribe the mode of
       assessment of merit of the employee who is eligible for
       consideration for promotion. Such assessment can be made by
       assigning marks on the basis of appraisal of performance on the
       basis of service record and interview and prescribing the minimum
       marks which would entitle a person to be promoted on the basis
       of seniority-cum-merit."





 
21. The learned counsel appearing for the respondents

relies upon 
B.V. Shivaiah & others v. K. Addanki Babu &

WA No.
 975 of 2011 and
C.R.P. Nos. 138 & 139 of 2011

                                      -:25:-



others [JT 1998 5 SC 96] in which paragraph No.18 is relevant.


In the case of 
Union of India & others v. Lt.Gen.Rajendra

Singh Kadyan and another
 [(2000) 6 SCC 698] the Hon'ble

three judges of the Apex Court have in fact considered the

service law with regard to promotion and criteria of a selection

which fall into three categories; 1. seniority-cum-fitness, 2.

seniority-cum-merit and 3. merit-cum-suitability with due regard

to seniority. Paragraph Nos.11 and 12 in detail refer to these

aspects, which read as under:




              "11. The hierarchy in the Army and the method of selection

       and promotion to various posts starting from the post of Lieutenant

       and going up to the post of the Chief of the Army Staff will clearly

       indicate that the posts of Lieutenant, Captain and Major are

       automatic promotion posts on passing the promotion examination

       irrespective of inter se merit, whereas the posts from Major to Lt.

       Colonel, Lt. Colonel to Colonel, Colonel to Brigadier, Brigadier to

       Major General and Major General to Lt. General are all selection

       posts filled up by promotion on the basis of relative merit assessed

       by the designated Selection Boards. From Lt. General (Corps

       Commander) to Army Commander is a non-selection post to which

       promotion is made subject to      fitness. It is a promotion subject to

       fitness in all respects, although the rank remains the same. From

       the post of Army Commander to that of the Chief of the Army

       Staff, it is by promotion for which no specific criteria have been

WA No. 975 of 2011 and
C.R.P. Nos. 138 & 139 of 2011

                                      -:26:-



       laid down. There have been precedents where the seniormost

       Army Commanders have not been appointed as the Chief of the

       Army Staff. Selection implies the right of rejection depending upon

       the criteria prescribed. Selection for promotion is based on

       different criteria depending upon the nature of the post and

       requirements of the service. Such criteria fall into three categories,

       namely,


       1. seniority-cum-fitness,


       2. seniority-cum-merit,


       3. merit-cum-suitability with due regard to seniority.


       12. Wherever fitness is stipulated as the basis of selection, it is

       regarded as a non-selection post to be filled on the basis of

       seniority subject to rejection of the unfit. Fitness means fitness in

       all respects. "Seniority-cum-merit" postulates the requirement of

       certain minimum merit or satisfying a benchmark previously fixed.

       Subject to fulfilling this requirement the promotion is based on

       seniority. There is no requirement of assessment of comparative

       merit both in the case of seniority-cum-fitness and seniority-cum-

       merit. Merit-cum-suitability with due regard to seniority as

       prescribed in the case of promotion to All-India Services

       necessarily involves assessment of comparative merit of all

       eligible candidates, and selecting the best out of them."




              22. On reading of the above paragraphs it is very

clear that there is a marginal difference in the meaning between

seniority-cum-fitness and seniority-cum-merit, but, there is no

requirement of assessment of comparative merit both in the case

WA No. 975 of 2011 and
C.R.P. Nos. 138 & 139 of 2011

                                 -:27:-



of seniority-cum-fitness and seniority-cum-merit. So far as merit-

cum-suitability, it necessarily requires assessment of comparative

merit of all eligible candidates and selection shall be made best

out of them. The word 'fitness' means fitness in all respects. But

there is no requirement of assessment of comparative merit. In

other words, merit is not the criterion in such cases. In view of

the above discussion and reasoning, there was justification on the

part of learned Single Judge to hold that the very selection

process was incorrect and therefore he was justified in quashing

Exts.P4, P5 and P13.



            23. As we are dismissing the writ appeal on merits,

Revision Petitions become infructuous as the whole selection

process has to be re-scheduled in the light of the observations

made as above. Accordingly, the Writ Appeal is dismissed. CRPs

are dismissed as infructuous.





 
We direct the respondent Board to appoint Principals in

terms of the provisions of the respective University Act and also

in the light of the principle enunciated in the judgments of the

WA No. 975 of 2011 and
C.R.P. Nos. 138 & 139 of 2011

                               -:28:-



Apex Court and in the Full Bench decision of this Court in 
Suresh

v. Manager, S.N.M. College
(supra).






                                       Manjula Chellur,
                                      Ag. Chief Justice.






                                   P.R.Ramachandra Menon,
                                           Judge.




ttb





