



[Cites 
64
, Cited by 
0
]




Madras High Court


R.Ayyapillai vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 11 July, 2019


Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 MAD 353


Author: 
S.M.Subramaniam


Bench: 
S.M.Subramaniam


                                                        1

                          BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT

                                                DATED: 11.07.2019

                                                    CORAM:

                             THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE S.M.SUBRAMANIAM

                                          W.P.(MD) No.21195 of 2014


                  R.Ayyapillai                                               ... Petitioner
                                                       vs.


                  1.The State of Tamil Nadu
                    rep.by its Secretary
                    Public Works Department
                    Fort St.George, Chennai-9

                  2.The Chief Engineer
                    Water Resource Organization
                    Chepauk, Chennai-5

                  3.The Chief Engineer
                    Water Resource Organization
                    Madurai Division, Madurai

                  4.The Superintending Engineer
                    Water Resource Organization
                    Tamirabarani Basin Circle
                    Palayamkottai, Tirunelveli-2

                  5.The Executive Engineer
                    P.W.D.Water Resources Organization
                    Kothaiyar Basin Division, Nagercoil                      ... Respondents


                  PRAYER: Writ Petition filed under 
Article 226
 of the Constitution of India for

                  issuance of writ of mandamus directing the 1st respondent to regularize the


http://www.judis.nic.in
                                                           2

                  service of the petitioner who is working as Gardener from 1994(NMR) with all

                  service benefit and grant all monetary benefits within a time stipulated by this

                  Court.



                          For Petitioner    : Ms.J.Anandhavalli
                          For Respondents : Mr.D.Muruganandham
                                            Additional Government Pleader


                                                      ORDER



                             The relief sought for in the present writ petition is for a direction to

                  the first respondent to regularize the services of the writ petitioner, who is

                  working as Gardener from 1994 (N.M.R.) with all service benefits and grant

                  monetary benefits.



                             2. The learned counsel for the writ petitioner made a submission

                  that the writ petitioner was initially engaged in Nominal Muster Roll (N.M.R.)

                  in the office of the fourth respondent from 01.05.1994. The writ petitioner was

                  engaged as Gardener (N.M.R.) in the respondent / Department and has

                  completed more than 20 years of service without any complaint.           The writ

                  petitioner filed O.A.No.5031 of 1998, before the Tamil Nadu Administrative

                  Tribunal, which was subsequently transferred to the High Court and

                  renumbered as W.P.No.43245 of 2006 and in the meanwhile, the Government


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            3


                  also    issued    G.O.Ms.No.22,    Personnel     and   Administrative    Reforms      (F)

                  Department,        dated   28.02.2006     and     G.O.Ms.No.334,      Public    Works

                  Department, dated 19.10.2007. Pursuant to these Government Orders, the

                  daily wage employees, who have rendered ten years of service as on

                  01.01.2006 were brought under the regular establishment.              Relying on the

                  said Government Orders, the learned counsel for the writ petitioner states that

                  the case of the writ petitioner was also recommended by the competent

                  authorities.      However, no final decision has been taken and the repeated

                  proposals sent by the authorities competent were not even considered by the

                  Government for granting the benefit of regularization to the writ petitioner.



                  For several years, the writ petitioner is waiting for the benefit of regularization

                  and the said benefit has not been extended sofar. Thus, the writ petitioner is

                  constrained to file the present writ petition.



                             3. This apart, this Court also passed an order in W.P.No.43241 of

                  2006, on 26.03.2009, directing the writ petitioner to submit a fresh

                  representation to the respondents and the respondents were directed to

                  consider    the    same    based   on   the   proposals   submitted     for   grant   of

                  regularization. In spite of the earlier orders of this Court, no final orders have

                  been passed by the Government with reference to the proposals submitted by

                  the authority concerned for grant of regularization.



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                         4


                           4. The learned Additional Government Pleader appearing for the

                  respondents, with reference to the counter affidavit filed by the fifth

                  respondent, states that the writ petitioner was appointed as a daily wage

                  employee and he was a casual labourer for specific work and whenever the

                  service of the writ petitioner was necessary, then only he was engaged. The

                  writ petitioner was not appointed through Employment Exchange. Thus, the

                  engagement of the writ petitioner as daily wage employee, was in violation of

                  the recruitment rules in force.       The writ petitioner is not eligible for

                  regularization in view of the fact that he was not a regular daily wage employee

                  appointed in the sanctioned post. This apart, G.O.Ms.No.22, Personnel and

                  Administrative Reforms (F) Department, dated 28.02.2006, had already been

                  withdrawn.    Subsequently, the Government issued another G.O.Ms.No.74,

                  Personnel and Administrative Reforms (F) Department, dated 27.06.2013,

                  imposing certain conditions and as per the said conditions also, the writ

                  petitioner is not entitled for the benefits of regularization and permanent

                  absorption.



                           5. The fact remains that the writ petitioner was engaged as a daily

                  wage employee.    In the earlier writ petition filed by the writ petitioner, this

                  Court passed an order directing the respondents to consider the writ


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                           5


                  petitioner's representation.      However, no order has been passed by the

                  respondent and the writ petitioner had also not pursued his remedy

                  thereafter.   However, the learned counsel for the writ petitioner states that

                  several proposals were submitted by the competent authority for considering

                  the case of the writ petitioner for grant of regularization.



                            6. Regularization or permanent absorption cannot be granted in

                  violation of the recruitment rules in force. The persons, who were appointed

                  by not following the recruitment rules and served as daily wage employees,

                  cannot seek the benefit of regularization.       The daily wage employees are

                  accepting the offer of appointment on certain terms and conditions. Once they

                  agreed the terms and conditions imposed for the daily wage engagement, then

                  they cannot turn around and claim the benefit of regularization in violation of

                  the recruitment rules in force.



                            7. With reference to the Water Resources Organization / Public

                  Works Department, this Court considered the grant of regularization and

                  permanent absorption in detail with reference to the Judgment of the

                  Constitution Bench of the Honourable Supreme Court, in W.P.Nos.28633 to

                  28646 of 2014, dated 12.12.2017.         The relevant paragraphs are extracted

                  hereunder:



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                             6


                                "5. The third respondent has admitted the fact that the 16
                          daily wage employees in the Irrigation Division at Gobi, are working
                          as daily wage employees. Under these circumstances,                the
                          Government issued G.O.Ms.No.74, Personnel and Administrative
                          Reforms (F) Department, dated 27.6.2013, imposing certain
                          conditions for granting regularisation of temporary/daily rated
                          employees.

                                6. In this pretext, the writ petitioners have submitted their
                          representation on 9.4.2014, seeking regularisation. The fourth
                          respondent sent a reply to the writ petitioners on 11.6.2014, by
                          stating that writ petitioners have been paid daily wages only
                          through the Contractors and therefore, their case cannot be
                          considered in accordance with G.O.Ms.No.74 dated 27.6.2013. The
                          writ petitioners have further submitted their representation on
                          15.9.2014. Under these circumstances, the fourth respondent
                          issued impugned order in proceedings dated 17.9.2014, rejecting
                          the claim of the writ petitioners for regularisation on the ground that
                          they were appointed on daily wage basis through the Contractors
                          and therefore, their claim cannot be entertained.

                                7. The learned counsel for the writ petitioners states that in
                          the present writ petitions, an interim order of status quo was
                          granted and that has not been complied with and the contempt
                          petitions were also filed. This Court, directing the Registry to list
                          the contempt petitions also along with these writ petitions, for final
                          disposal.

 
8. The learned counsel for the writ petitioners made a
                          submission that it is the duty mandatory on the part of the
                          respondents to consider the case of the writ petitioners for


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                                7


                          regularisation in the existing vacancies since the writ petitioners
                          have put in more than 10 years of their services as daily wage
                          employees and their names are registered under the Nominal
                          Muster Roll maintained by the respondents. It is not the case of
                          appointment of        the   writ petitioners    but the     case   of    their
                          regularisation is the contention of the writ petitioners. When the
                          employees have completed 10 years of their services, without the
                          intervention of any Court order then their services to be regularised
                          as per paragraph 53 of the Constitution Bench judgment of the
                          Honourable Supreme Court of India, in the case of 
State of
                          Karnataka v. Umadevi
 [(2006) 4 SCC 1], laid down the legal
                          principles in the matter of regularisation, permanent absorption.


                          The relevant Paragraph 53 of the judgment, cited supra, is
                          extracted hereunder:-

                                  “53.One aspect needs to be clarified. There may be cases
                          where     irregular   appointments     (not    illegal   appointments)     as
                          explained in S.V. Narayanappa [(1967) 1 SCR 128 : AIR 1967 SC
                          1071] , R.N. Nanjundappa [(1972) 1 SCC 409 : (1972) 2 SCR 799]
                          and B.N. Nagarajan [(1979) 4 SCC 507 : 1980 SCC (L&S) 4 : (1979)
                          3 SCR 937] and referred to in para 15 above, of duly qualified
                          persons in duly sanctioned vacant posts might have been made
                          and the employees have continued to work for ten years or more
                          but without the intervention of orders of the courts or of tribunals.

                          The question of regularisation of the services of such employees
                          may have to be considered on merits in the light of the principles
                          settled by this Court in the cases abovereferred to and in the light
                          of this judgment. In that context, the Union of India, the State
                          Governments and their instrumentalities should take steps to


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                             8


                          regularise as a one-time measure, the services of such irregularly
                          appointed, who have worked for ten years or more in duly
                          sanctioned posts but not under cover of orders of the courts or of
                          tribunals and should further ensure that regular recruitments are
                          undertaken to fill those vacant sanctioned posts that require to be
                          filled up, in cases where temporary employees or daily wagers are
                          being now employed. The process must be set in motion within six
                          months from this date. We also clarify that regularisation, if any
                          already made, but not sub judice, need not be reopened based on
                          this judgment, but there should be no further bypassing of the
                          constitutional requirement and regularising or making permanent,
                          those not duly appointed as per the constitutional scheme.”

                                   9. The writ petitioners, though admit the fact that their
                          appointment was irregular, contended that their appointments are
                          not illegal and therefore their services ought to have been
                          regularised in view of the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of
                          India.



                                   10. Further, it is contended that the right to life is a
                          Fundamental Right enshrined in 
Article 21
 of the Constitution of
                          India. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, time and again,
                          reiterated and emphasised that the right to life cannot be
                          interpreted as a mere animal life and it is a decent life, which is to
                          be ensured. The writ petitioners are deprived of their livelihood in
                          view of the denial of regularisation which amounts to deprivation of
                          their life. At the outset, it is stated that the writ petitioners have
                          worked for 10 years or more and without the intervention of orders
                          of the courts or of tribunals. In other words, the State Governments
                          and their instrumentalities should take steps to regularise as a one-



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                             9


                          time measure, the services of such irregularly appointed, who have
                          worked for ten years or more in duly sanctioned posts but not
                          under cover of orders of the courts or of tribunals and should
                          further ensure that regular recruitments are undertaken to fill those
                          vacant sanctioned posts that require to be filled up, in cases where
                          temporary employees or daily wagers are being now employed. The
                          appointments of such employee should not be illegal. Even if
                          irregular, where the appointments are not made against the
                          sanctioned posts. Where a person employed under the open
                          competitive process of prescribed qualifications and was working
                          against the sanctioned posts, he had been selected without
                          undergoing the open competitive process, such appointments are
                          considered to be irregular.



                                11. Mooting out the above two principles, the learned counsel
                          for the writ petitioners urged this Court by stating that in respect of
                          the   irregular   appointments,   there   is   no   bar   for   granting
                          regularisation. But the learned counsel is of the opinion that the
                          illegal appointments alone, cannot be regularised. As far as the
                          irregular appointments are concerned, the length of service is to be
                          taken into account for the purpose of granting regularisation.
                          Accordingly, the writ petitioners are entitled for regularisation in
                          view of the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, cited
                          supra.



                                12. The learned Additional Government Pleader, appearing
                          on behalf of the respondents, submit that the writ petitioners were
                          engaged as casual labourers for certain specific works under the
                          provisions of paragraph 290 of T.N.PWA Code which is in
                          connection with the execution of work. The writ petitioners have not

http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                             10


                          been accommodated in any sanctioned posts. The writ petitioners
                          were not engaged in connection with any affairs of the State
                          Government. The Hon'ble High Court of Madras had already held
                          that PWD is not an industry to involve the Industrial Establishment
                          Rules. Further, it is submitted that the writ petitioners have not
                          been appointed in sanctioned posts. The writ petitioners were
                          engaged only to execute certain special and specified works on
                          daily wage basis and therefore, the benefit of regularisation, cannot
                          be granted.



                                  13. Further, it is submitted that in Government Offices, there
                          are specified sanction as to the category of post, number of such
                          posts, scale of pay etc., and the method of recruitment to the posts
                          are defined by statutory rules such as Tamil Nadu State and
                          Subordinate Service Rules and no deviation is permitted from the
                          method of recruitment, howsoever, save the previous approval of
                          the Government.



                                  14. Paragraph 290 of Tamil Nadu Public Works Account
                          Code specifies that with the following exceptions, all persons
                          engaged departmentally for the execution of works are considered
                          as day labourers and their wages should be drawn on Muster
                          Rolls, Form 21 (C.Form Nos.474 and 475) and charged to the
                          estimates of the works on which they are employed:-



                                  (i) Permanent and temporary employees of the division whose
                          pay is charged to the head 'Establishment';



                                  (ii) Members of the works charged establishment as defined
                          in paragraphs 58 to 62 of Tamil Nadu Public Works Department
                          Code.



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                               11


                                15. Thus, the above two categories only form part of the
                          establishment concerning with the PWD Office in the State and the
                          recruitment to the posts are made in accordance with the rules of
                          the different services codified in Tamil Nadu Service Manual
                          Volume I to III and therefore, the writ petitioners were engaged as
                          casual labourers for the purpose of specified nature of work to
                          which an estimate is got sanctioned as per Tamil Nadu Public
                          Works Department Code, to the extent necessary.



                                16. Paragraph 290 of the TNPWD Code states that for the
                          work done by daily labour, the subordinate incharge of the work
                          will prepare a Muster or Casual Labour Roll recording there on
                          when practicable the work done and the amount payable.



                                17. As the writ petitioners were engaged as casual labourers
                          for a specified work and that necessity for engagement of such
                          casual labour virtually stopped as and when the work is completed.
                          The engagement was not made on daily wage basis or not made on
                          any Service Rules. Thus, the question of regularisation of
                          petitioners' NMR services do not arise.



                                18. The learned Additional Government Pleader for the
                          respondents, further stated that paragraphs 6(i), (ii), (vi), (vii), (ix) of
                          Government Order No.74, Personnel and Administrative Reforms (F)
                          Department, dated 27.6.2013, the Government have ordered that

                                “6(i) This order shall be deemed to have been come into force
                          with retrospective effect from 1.1.2006;



                                6(ii) The services of the full time daily wage employees, who
                          were initially appointed on full time basis in consultation with the
                          Employment Exchange, to discharge the function of the post in the


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                             12


                          Tamil Nadu Basic Service and completed 10 (ten) years of service
                          as on 1.1.2006 shall be regularised against regular vacancies in
                          the sanctioned cadre strength; Further, in paragraph 6(ii), it is
                          stated that the service of the full time daily wage employees who
                          were initially appointed on full time basis in consultation with the
                          Employment Exchange to discharge the function of the post in the
                          Tamil Nadu Basic Service and completed ten years of service as on
                          1.1.2006 shall be regularised against regular vacancies in the
                          sanctioned cadre strength;



                                6(vi) The part-time and casual employees are not entitled to
                          the concession referred to at paragraph (ii) above;



                                6(vii) The services of the full time daily wage employees, who
                          have completed 10 years of service, after 1.1.2006, shall not be
                          regularised;



                                6(ix) Stipulates that all the proposals for regularisation of the
                          services of full time daily wages employees should be sent to the
                          Government even in case where relaxation of rules are not
                          involved”.



                                19. Whereas the writ petitioners in these writ petitions have
                          not completed 10 years of service as on 1.1.2006 by daily wage
                          basis. But, the writ petitioners were not appointed in consultation
                          with the Employment Exchange as daily wagers. The Government
                          Orders issued with regard to the regularisation of Contingent Staff
                          to regular servants are only on completion of 10 years of
                          continuous service as contingent servants. Thus, the question of
                          regularisation of service of the writ petitioners do not arise.



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                             13


                                20. In this regard, this Court delivered a judgment in WP No.
                          41594 of 2006 dated 3.1.2011 regarding NMR case as follows:-



                                “The petitioner produced a Certificate issued by one
                          Assistant Engineer WRO/Public Works Department, Irrigation
                          Section, Vadakkankulam to the effect that has been working as
                          NMR from 1.6.1992. It is also not stated whether pursuant to any
                          order, the petitioner has been working on the contrary, the
                          petitioner's claim was that they should be absorbed by reglarising
                          her service. It is also admitted that she was not routed through
                          Employment Exchange and the G.O.Ms.No.177, dated 4.6.1998,
                          does not ensure to the benefit.



 
The Supreme Court in 
Secretary, State of Karnataka vs.
                          Umadevi
, reported in (2006) 4 SCC 1, has held that regularisation
                          cannot be a method of recruitment unless the petitioner has the
                          case for absorption. As per the orders of the Government in the
                          Original Application (later converted into the writ petition) the relief
                          claimed by the petitioner, cannot be countenanced by this Court.
                          Hence, the writ petition stands dismissed.”


                                21. It is further submitted by the learned Additional
                          Government Pleader for the respondents that the related issue was
                          dealt with by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Civil Appeal
                          Nos.2726-2729 of 2014 and referred the case between State of
                          Karnataka and others vs. Uma Devi and others in AIR 2006
                          SC 1806, held as under:-



                                “There is no fundamental right in those who have been
                          employed on daily wages or temporarily or on contractual basis, to
                          claim that they have a right to be absorbed in service. As has been


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            14


                          held by this Court, they cannot be said to be holders of a post,
                          since, a regular appointment could be made only by making
                          appointments consistent with the requirements of 
Articles 14
 and
                          
16
 of the Constitution. The right to be treated equally with the other
                          employees employed on daily wages, cannot be extended to a claim
                          for equal treatment with those who were regularly employed. That
                          would be treating unequals as equals. It cannot also be relied on to
                          claim a right to be absorbed in service even though they have never
                          been selected in terms of the relevant recruitment rules.”


 
22. The learned Additional Government Pleader also referred
                          to the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court case in 
State of
                          Rajasthan and others vs. V.Dayal Lal and Others
 [AIR 2011
                          SC 1193] held as under:-




                                “(i) The High Courts, in exercising power under 
Article 226
 of
                          the Constitution will not issue directions for regularisation,
                          absorption or permanent continuance, unless the employees
                          claiming regularisation had been appointed in pursuance of a
                          regular recruitment in accordance with relevant rules in an open
                          competitive process, against sanctioned vacant posts. The equality
                          clause contained in 
Articles 14
 and 
16
 should be scrupulously
                          followed and Courts should not issue a direction for regularisation
                          of services of an employee which would be violative of the
                          constitutional scheme. While something that is irregular for want of
                          compliance with one of the elements in the process of selection
                          which does not go to the root of the process, can be regularised,
                          back door entries, appointments contrary to the constitutional
                          scheme and/or appointment of ineligible candidates cannot be
                          regularised.



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                                   15


                                   (ii) Mere continuation of service by a temporary or ad hoc or
                          daily-wage employee, under cover of some interim orders of the
                          Court, would not confer upon him any right to be absorbed into
                          service, as such service would be “litigious employment”. Even
                          temporary, ad hoc or daily-wage service for a long number of years,
                          let alone service for one or two years, will not entitle such employee
                          to claim regularisation, if he is not working against a sanctioned
                          post. Sympathy and sentiment cannot be grounds for passing any
                          order of regularisation in the absence of a legal right.



                                   (iii) Even where a scheme is formulated for regularisation
                          with a cut-off date (that is a scheme providing that persons who
                          had put in a specified number of years of service and continuing in
                          employment as on the cut-off date), it is not possible to others who
                          were appointed subsequent to the cut-off date, to claim or contend
                          that the scheme should be applied to them by extending the cut-off
                          date or seek a direction for framing of fresh schemes providing for
                          successive cut-off dates.



                                   (iv) Part-time employees are not entitled to seek regularisation
                          as they are not working against any sanctioned posts. There cannot
                          be   a     direction   for    absorption,     regularisation   or   permanent
                          continuance of part-time temporary employees.



                                   (v)   Part-time     temporary    employees     in     government-run
                          institutions cannot claim parity in salary with regular employees of
                          the Government on the principle of equal pay for equal work. Nor
                          can employees in private employment, even if serving full time, seek
                          parity in salary with government employees. The right to claim a
                          particular salary against the State must arise under a contract or
                          under a statute.”

http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                              16


                          Based on the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, cited supra,
                          Codal Rules and Government orders, the claim of the writ
                          petitioners cannot be considered.



                                23. The learned Additional Government Pleader further
                          submitted that paragraph 290 of TNPWD Code states that “for work
                          done by daily labour the subordinate incharge of the work will
                          prepare a Muster or Casual Labour Roll recording there on when
                          practicable the work done and the amount payable”. The writ
                          petitioners were engaged as casual labour for a specified work and
                          that necessity for engagement of such casual labour virtually
                          stopped as and when the work is completed. The writ petitioners
                          have not been accommodated in any sanctioned posts. The writ
                          petitioners cannot claim any right for this casual labour work.



                                24. The learned Additional Government Pleader further
                          submitted that as per Code Rules, G.O.Ms.No.12, Public Works (C2)
                          Department dated 20.1.2009, G.O.Ms.No.338, Finance (Pay Cell)
                          Department,   dated   26.8.2010,     G.O.Ms.No.74,    Personnel   and
                          Administrative Reforms (F) Department, dated 27.6.2013, Hon'ble
                          High Court in W.P.No.41594 of 2006 dated 3.1.2011 judgment and
                          the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, New Delhi in Civil Appeal No.
                          2726-2729 of 2014, dated 21.2.2014 judgment, cited supra, the
                          claim of the writ petitioners cannot be considered.



                                25. The writ petitioners were not employed in connection with
                          the affairs of the State as defined in 
Article 323-A
 of the
                          Constitution of India and they were only casual labourers co-
                          terminus with the purposeful completion of the work concerned as
                          per the Acts and the Rules, in which such provision for the
                          deployment of casual labour is made. Thus, the writ petitioners are

http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                              17


                          estopped from invoking the lofty jurisdiction of this Apex Forum
                          outside the ambit of the constitutional provisions.



                                26. At the outset, the grounds relied on by the learned
                          Additional Government Pleader, appearing on behalf of the
                          respondents, are enumerated as under:-



                                (i) The engagement of casual labour and payment made by
                          way of wages from part and parcel of the work accounts vide
                          Chapter X-B and in the manner prescribed in paragraphs 290 and
                          291 of TNPWA Code, exclusively for the execution of works;



                                (ii) The casual labourers thus engaged for a particular work
                          cannot be regularised how so ever in any manner, without sanction
                          of the post, scale of pay etc., by the Government;



                                (iii) The writ petitioners were not employed in connection with
                          the affairs of the State as defined in 
Article 323-A
 of the
                          Constitution of India and the writ petitioners were only casual
                          labourers co-terminus with the purposeful completion of the works
                          concerned as per the Acts and the Rules in which such provisions
                          for the deployment of casual labour is made;



                                (iv) The engagement of casual labourers and payment made
                          by way of wages from part and parcel of the work accounts vide
                          Chamber X-B and in the manner prescribed in paragraphs 290 and
                          291 of TNPWA Code, exclusively for the execution of works;



                                (v) As per Code Rules, G.O.Ms.No.12, Public Works (C2)
                          Department, dated 20.1.2009, G.O.Ms.No.338, Finance (Pay Cell)
                          Department,    dated   26.8.2010,    G.O.Ms.No.74,    Personnel   and
                          Administrative Reforms (F) Department, dated 27.6.2013, this Court
                          in W.P.No.41594 of 2006 dated 3.1.2011 judgment and the Hon'ble

http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                              18


                          Supreme Court of India, New Delhi in Civil Appeal No.2726-2729 of
                          2014 dated 21.2.2014, judgment cited supra, the claim of the writ
                          petitioners cannot be considered;



                                (vi) The Government have issued orders in G.O.Ms.No.680,
                          Public Works (C2) Department, dated 16.8.1995 for complete ban
                          on appointing new Nominal Muster Rolls, which is already in force.
                          In this regard, D.O.Letter No.26860/C2/2009-2 dated 15.10.2009
                          received from the Principal Secretary to Government, PWD,
                          Chennai, is submitted for perusal. Thus, the Article quoted in the
                          application, cannot be correlated with the affairs of the State;



                                (vii) The writ petitioners were not borne on any cadre strength
                          of the erstwhile work charged establishment (now amended in
                          Tamil Nadu Engineering Subordinate Service) and the service and
                          the writ petitioners were not connected with the affairs of the State
                          Government;



                                (viii) The writ petitioners were engaged as casual labourers
                          for a specified work and that necessity for engagement of such
                          casual labourers virtually stopped as and when the work was
                          completed. In view of the above, the claim of the writ petitioners
                          cannot be considered.



 
27. Considering the arguments advanced both by the learned
                          counsel for the petitioners as well as the learned counsel for the
                          respondents, this Court has to first consider the factual matrix
                          involved in these writ petitions on hand.       The writ petitioners,
                          undoubtedly, were appointed as daily wage employees in the year
                          2003 and they are continued in service for more than ten years, is
                          the claim set out in these writ petitions. However, pursuant to the


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                               19


                          Judgment of the Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
                          of India in the case of 
The State of Karnataka Vs. Umadevi
,
                          reported in (2006) 4 SCC 1 [herein after referred to as
                          “Umadevi Case”], one time benefit was granted by the Hon'ble
                          Supreme Court of India in Paragraph (53) of the Judgment.


 
28. Even before 
the said judgment
, the State of Tamil Nadu
                          issued G.O.Ms.No.22, Personnel and Administrative Reforms (F)
                          Department, dated 28.02.2006. As per the said Government Order,
                          the temporary employees who have completed ten years of service
                          as on the date of the Government Order can be regularised. Even
                          prior to the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, the
                          Government issued G.O.Ms.No.22, Personnel and Administrative
                          Reforms (F) Department, dated 28.02.2006, granting the benefit of
                          one time regularization in respect of the temporary employees who
                          have completed ten years of service as on 28.02.2006. Thus, the
                          State was extending the benefit of regularization or permanent
                          absorption to the temporary/daily rated employees who have
                          completed ten years of service as on 28.02.2006.


                                  29. Pursuant to the said Government order, large number of
                          temporary    employees      were     conferred   with   the   benefit    of
                          regularization and based on that, the writ petitioner also raised his
                          claim for regularization.     However, after the Constitution Bench
                          judgment rendered in “Umadevi Case”, the State Government
                          issued G.O.Ms.No.74, Personnel and Administrative Department,
                          dated    27.06.2013.     In    the   above   said   G.O.Ms.No.74,       the
                          Government have imposed certain conditions and those conditions
                          are akin to that of the recruitment rules in force. The very idea of
                          issuing G.O.Ms.No.74, is to provide certain restricted concession to


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                                  20


                          the temporary employees who were otherwise appointed by
                          following the recruitment rules in force. Therefore, the prospectus
                          of the large number of employees who have served on daily wage
                          basis are prevented from getting their regularization.                  In other
                          words, the said G.O.Ms.No.74 prescribes certain conditions and
                          restrictions    for    regularization    and   for     granting    permanent
                          absorption. Thus, the persons who are eligible to be regularized
                          under G.O.Ms.No.22, are prevented from getting the benefit from
                          and out of the said Government order and G.O.Ms.No.74, imposes
                          certain restrictions.

                                30. Thus, the learned counsel brought to the notice of this
                          Court that in the similar circumstances, the learned Single Judge of
                          this Court dealt with the issues in W.P.No.29346 of 2014 &
                          etc.,batch and delivered a judgment on 22.09.2017, setting aside
                          the said G.O.Ms.No.74, in respect of extending the same with
                          retrospective effect.      In other words, the implementation of the
                          Government       orders    was    restricted    only    prospectively       and
                          accordingly, the relief of regularization was granted to those writ
                          petitioners.

                                31. The learned Additional Government Pleader brought to
                          the notice of this Court that the State preferred Writ Appeals in
                          W.A.Sr.No.89134/17 in W.P.29346/14, W.A.Sr.No.89136/17 in
                          W.P.No. 7594/14, W.A.Sr. No.89142/17 in W.P.No.15668/14,
                          W.A.Sr.No.89143/17 in W.P. No.13545/14,W.A.Sr.No. 89138/17
                          in W.P.No.29212/14 on 13.11.2017, against 
the said judgment
 and
                          the same is pending.

                                32.      Thus,    this   Court    has    to    consider     the    issues
                          independently and based on the judgments of the Apex Court of


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                              21


                          India in the matter of regularization and permanent absorption.
                          However, the learned Additional Government Pleader brought to the
                          notice of this Court that the Hon'ble Division Bench of this Court
                          passed an order in the batch of Writ Appeals in W.A.No.2911 of
                          2012 and etc., batch on 10.07.2014, wherein the Hon'ble Division
                          Bench has considered the terms and conditions imposed in
                          G.O.Ms.No.74 and passed an order stating that the services shall
                          not be disturbed in the light of the Government Order passed in
                          G.O.Ms.No.74, Personnel and Administrative Reforms Department
                          dated 27.06.2013 as well as the order passed by the Hon'ble
                          Supreme Court of India in Civil Appeal Nos.2726-2729 of 2014 with
                          Nos.2730-31 of 2014.

                                   33. The Additional Government Pleader is of the opinion that
                          the terms and conditions imposed in G.O.Ms.No.74 had already
                          been taken note of by the Hon'ble Division Bench and the entire
                          Government Order was upheld and the direction was issued to
                          pass orders in the light of the G.O.Ms.No.74 and therefore, the
                          judgment delivered by the learned Single Judge, need not be relied
                          upon and more so, the State also preferred writ appeals against the
                          said orders.

                                   34. Under these circumstances, this Court has to consider the
                          issues independently based on the judgments of the Apex Court of
                          India.

                                   35. The authoritative judgment in the subject of regularization
                          and permanent absorption is the judgment of the Constitution
                          Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in “Umadevi Case”.
                          All other subsequent judgments cited by the respective counsels are
                          by the Hon'ble Two Judges Bench of the Supreme Court of India.



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            22


                          Thus, the binding nature of the judgments rendered in respect of
                          other cases has to be cogently read and harmoniously interpreted
                          based on the legal principles settled by the Constitution Bench of
                          the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India.

                                36. Before considering the subject of regularization and
                          permanent absorption, this Court has to consider the interpretation
                          of the judgments on “binding nature” or “binding precedent” . In
                          view of the fact that the learned counsel for the petitioner has cited
                          number of judgments, which were passed subsequent to the
                          Constitution Bench judgment, stating that Paragraph (53) of the
                          “Umadevi Case” has been interpreted in different ways and under
                          different circumstances and the present case is also to be
                          considered and a direction to be issued for regularization. In view
                          of the fact that large number of judgments are cited before this
                          Court in the matter of regularization and permanent absorption,
                          now, this Court has to first decide what all are the judgments which
                          all are having a “binding precedent” and on this reason, this Court
                          has to consider very interpretation of the concept regarding
                          “binding precedent”.     
In respect of judgments in relation to the
                          interpretation of “binding precedent”, this Court is inclined to
                          consider the very recent judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of
                          India in the case of 
National Insurance Co. Ltd vs Pranay
                          Sethi and Others
, reported in JT 2017 (10) SC 450.               It is
                          pertinent to note that it is a judgment by the Constitution Bench of
                          the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India headed by His Lordship,
                          Hon'ble Chief Justice of India, Dipak Misra.CJI,. The Hon'ble Chief
                          Justice of India delivered this judgment and it is relevant to quote
                          paragraphs (15 to 26):




http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            23


                          “15. The aforesaid analysis in Santosh Devi (supra) may prima
                          facie show that the two-Judge Bench has distinguished the
                          observation made in Sarla Verma’s case but on a studied scrutiny,
                          it becomes clear that it has really expressed a different view than
                          what has been laid down in Sarla Verma (supra). If we permit
                          ourselves to say so, the different view has been expressed in a
                          distinctive tone, for the two-Judge Bench had stated that it was
                          extremely difficult to fathom any rationale for the observations
                          made in para 24 of the judgment in Sarla Verma’s case in respect
                          of self-employed or a person on fixed salary without provision for
                          annual increment, etc. This is a clear disagreement with the earlier
                          view, and we have no hesitation in saying that it is absolutely
                          impermissible keeping in view the concept of binding precedents.



                                16. Presently, we may refer to certain decisions which deal
                          with the concept of binding precedent.



                                17. 
In 
State of Bihar v. Kalika Kuer
 alias Kalika Singh
                          and others [JT (2003) (4) SC 489], it has been held:-




                                “10. … an earlier decision may seem to be incorrect to a
                          Bench of a coordinate jurisdiction considering the question later, on
                          the ground that a possible aspect of the matter was not considered
                          or not raised before the court or more aspects should have been
                          gone into by the court deciding the matter earlier but it would not be
                          a reason to say that the decision was rendered per incuriam and
                          liable to be ignored. The earlier judgment may seem to be not
                          correct yet it will have the binding effect on the later Bench of
                          coordinate jurisdiction. …”


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                                24


                                17.1.The Court has further ruled:-“10. … Easy course of
                          saying that earlier decision was rendered per incuriam is not
                          permissible and the matter will have to be resolved only in two
                          ways — either to follow the earlier decision or refer the matter to a
                          larger Bench to examine the issue, in case it is felt that earlier
                          decision is not correct on merits.”


                                18. In G.L. Batra v. State of Haryana and others (2014)
                          13 SCC 759), the Court has accepted the said principle on the basis
                          of judgments of this Court rendered in Union of India v. Godfrey
                          Philips India Ltd. (1985) 4 SCC 369), Sundarjas Kanyalal
                          Bhatija v. Collector, Thane, Maharashtra (1989) 3 SCC

 
396)and Tribhovandas Purshottamdas Thakkar v. Ratilal
                          Motilal Patel
 (AIR 1968 SC 372).
 
It may be noted here that the
                          Constitution Bench in 
Madras Bar Association v. Union of India
                          and another
 [JT 2015(5)SC 33]has clearly stated that the prior
                          Constitution Bench judgment in 
Union of India v. Madras Bar
                          Association [JT
 2010 (5) SC 553]is a binding precedent. Be it
                          clarified, the issues that were put to rest in the earlier Constitution
                          Bench judgment were treated as precedents by latter Constitution
                          Bench.




                                19. 
In this regard, we may refer to a passage from 
Jaisri
                          Sahu v. Rajdewan Dubey
 (AIR 1962 SC 83):-




                                “11. Law will be bereft of all its utility if it should be thrown
                          into a state of uncertainty by reason of conflicting decisions, and it
                          is therefore desirable that in case of difference of opinion, the
                          question should be authoritatively settled. It sometimes happens


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            25


                          that an earlier decision given by a Bench is not brought to the notice
                          of a Bench hearing the same question, and a contrary decision is
                          given without reference to the earlier decision. The question has
                          also been discussed as to the correct procedure to be followed
                          when two such conflicting decisions are placed before a later
                          Bench. The practice in the Patna High Court appears to be that in
                          those cases, the earlier decision is followed and not the later. In
                          England the practice is, as noticed in the judgment in Seshamma v.
                          Venkata Narasimharao that the decision of a court of appeal is
                          considered as a general rule to be binding on it. There are
                          exceptions to it, and one of them is thus stated in Halsbury’s Laws
                          of England, 3rd Edn., Vol. 22, para 1687, pp. 799-800:



                                “The court is not bound to follow a decision of its own if given
                          per incuriam. A decision is given per incuriam when the court has
                          acted in ignorance of a previous decision of its own or of a Court of
                          a co-ordinate jurisdiction which covered the case before it, or when
                          it has acted in ignorance of a decision of the House of Lords. In the
                          former case it must decide which decision to follow, and in the latter
                          it is bound by the decision of the House of Lords.”In Virayya v.
                          Venkata Subbayya it has been held by the Andhra High Court
                          that under the circumstances aforesaid the Bench is free to adopt
                          that view which is in accordance with justice and legal principles
                          after taking into consideration the views expressed in the two
                          conflicting Benches, vide also the decision of the Nagpur High Court
                          in Bilimoria v. Central Bank of India. The better course would be for
                          the Bench hearing the case to refer the matter to a Full Bench in
                          view of the conflicting authorities without taking upon itself to
                          decide whether it should follow the one Bench decision or the other.



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                           26


                          We have no doubt that when such situations arise, the Bench
                          hearing cases would refer the matter for the decision of a Full
                          Court.”


                                20. Though the aforesaid was articulated in the context of
                          the High Court, yet this Court has been following the same as is
                          revealed from the aforestated pronouncements including that of the
                          Constitution Bench and, therefore, we entirely agree with the said
                          view because it is the precise warrant of respecting a precedent
                          which is the fundamental norm of judicial discipline.



                                21. 
In the context, we may fruitfully note what has been
                          stated in 
Pradip Chandra Parija and others v. Pramod
                          Chandra Patnaik and others
 [JT (2002) 5 SCC 23]. In the said
                          case, the Constitution Bench was dealing with a situation where the
                          two-Judge Bench disagreeing with the three-Judge Bench decision
                          directed the matter to be placed before a larger Bench of five
                          Judges of this Court. In that scenario, the Constitution Bench
                          stated:-“6. … In our view, judicial discipline and propriety demands
                          that a Bench of two learned Judges should follow a decision of a
                          Bench of three learned Judges. But if a Bench of two learned
                          Judges concludes that an earlier judgment of three learned Judges
                          is so very incorrect that in no circumstances can it be followed, the
                          proper course for it to adopt is to refer the matter before it to a
                          Bench of three learned Judges setting out, as has been done here,
                          the reasons why it could not agree with the earlier judgment. …


                                22. 
In 
Chandra Prakash and others v. State of U.P. and
                          another
 [JT (2002) (3) SC 493], another Constitution Bench
                          dealing with the concept of precedents stated thus:-




http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            27


                                “22. … The doctrine of binding precedent is of utmost
                          importance in the administration of our judicial system. It promotes
                          certainty and consistency in judicial decisions. Judicial consistency
                          promotes confidence in the system, therefore, there is this need for
                          consistency in the enunciation of legal principles in the decisions of
                          this Court. It is in the above context, this Court in the case of
                          Raghubir Singh (1989) 2 SCC 754)held that a pronouncement of
                          law by a Division Bench of this Court is binding on a Division Bench
                          of the same or smaller number of Judges. …


                                23. Be it noted, Chandra Prakash concurred with the view
                          expressed in Raghubir Singh and Pradip Chandra Parija.



                                24. 
In 
Sandhya Educational Society and another v.
                          Union of India and others
 (2014) 7 SCC 701), it has been
                          observed that judicial decorum and discipline is paramount and,
                          therefore, a coordinate Bench has to respect the judgments and
                          orders passed by another coordinate Bench.
 
In 
Rattiram and
                          others v. State of Madhya Pradesh
 (2012) 4 SCC 516), the
                          Court dwelt upon the issue what would be the consequent effect of
                          the latter decision which had been rendered without noticing the
                          earlier decisions.
 The Court noted the observations in Raghubir
                          Singh (supra) and reproduced a passage from Indian Oil
                          Corporation Ltd. v. Municipal Corporation (1995) 4 SCC

 
96)which is to the following effect:-“8. … The Division Bench of the
                          High Court in 
Municipal Corpn., Indore v. Ratnaprabha Dhanda

                          was clearly in error in taking the view that the decision of this Court
                          in Ratnaprabha was not binding on it. In doing so, the Division
                          Bench of the High Court did something which even a later coequal


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                           28


                          Bench of this Court did not and could not do. …


                                25. It also stated what has been expressed in Raghubir
                          Singh (supra) by R.S. Pathak, C.J. It is as follows:-“28. We are of
                          opinion that a pronouncement of law by a Division Bench of this
                          Court is binding on a Division Bench of the same or a smaller
                          number of Judges, and in order that such decision be binding, it is
                          not necessary that it should be a decision rendered by the Full
                          Court or a Constitution Bench of the Court. …”


                                26. In Rajesh (supra) the three-Judge Bench had delivered
                          the judgment on 12.04.2013. The purpose of stating the date is that
                          it has been delivered after the pronouncement made in Reshma
                          Kumari’s case. On a perusal of the decision in Rajesh (supra), we
                          find that an attempt has been made to explain what the two- Judge
                          Bench had stated in Santosh Devi (supra). The relevant passages
                          read as follows:-



                                “8. Since, the Court in Santosh Devi case actually intended
                          to follow the principle in the case of salaried persons as laid down
                          in Sarla Verma case and to make it applicable also to the self-
                          employed and persons on fixed wages, it is clarified that the
                          increase in the case of those groups is not 30% always; it will also
                          have a reference to the age. In other words, in the case of self-
                          employed or persons with fixed wages, in case, the deceased victim
                          was below 40 years, there must be an addition of 50% to the actual
                          income of the deceased while computing future prospects. Needless
                          to say that the actual income should be income after paying the tax,
                          if any. Addition should be 30% in case the deceased was in the age


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                           29


                          group of 40 to 50 years.9. In Sarla Verma case, it has been stated
                          that in the case of those above 50 years, there shall be no addition.
                          Having regard to the fact that in the case of those self-employed or
                          on fixed wages, where there is normally no age of superannuation,
                          we are of the view that it will only be just and equitable to provide
                          an addition of 15% in the case where the victim is between the age
                          group of 50 to 60 years so as to make the compensation just,
                          equitable, fair and reasonable. There shall normally be no addition
                          thereafter.”


 
37. The Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of
                          India, while dealing with the cases of accident claims, has
                          elaborately discussed about the “binding precedent”. The case in
                          relation to the Motor Accident Claims, the case of “Sarla Verma”
                          was being followed by all the Courts across the Country for the
                          purpose of awarding compensation. When the question arosed that
                          the “binding nature” of the said case of “Sarla Verma” delivered
                          by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, the Constitution Bench
                          headed by the Hon'ble Chief Justice of India held that the principles
                          laid down in the case of 
“Virayya v. Venkata Subbayya”
 , it has
                          been held by the Andhra Pradesh High Court that under the
                          circumstances aforesaid the Bench is free to adopt that view which
                          is in accordance with justice and legal principles after taking into
                          consideration the views expressed in the two conflicting Benches, it
                          is further held that in the case of 
State of Bihar v. Kalika Kuer

                          alias Kalika Singh and others, reported in [JT (2003) 4 SC
                          489], held that the earlier judgment may seem to be not correct yet
                          it will have the binding effect on the later Bench of coordinate
                          jurisdiction.
 
Their Lordships rendered the case of Chandra

http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                             30


Prakash and others v. State of U.P. and another
, reported in
                          [JT 2002 (3) SC 493], held that the doctrine of binding precedent
                          is of utmost importance in the administration of our judicial system.


                          It promotes certainty and consistency in judicial decisions. Judicial
                          consistency promotes confidence in the system, therefore, there is
                          this need for consistency in the enunciation of legal principles in the
                          decisions of this Court.

                                38. By enumerating the legal principle in this regard, the
                          Apex Court of India held that the judgment by the Larger Bench of
                          the Courts are to be treated as “binding precedent”, while deciding
                          the legal principles involved in the particular case.

                                39. Another Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
                          of India in the case of Padma Sundara Rao and Others Vs.
                          State of Tamil Nadu and others, reported in (2002) 3 SCC
                          533, and the relevant paragraph (9) of the Judgment is extracted
                          hereunder:

                                “9. Courts should not place reliance on decisions without
                          discussing as to how the factual situation fits in with the fact
                          situation of the decision on which reliance is placed. There is
                          always peril in treating the words of a speech or judgment as
                          though they are words in a legislative enactment, and it is to be
                          remembered that judicial utterances are made in the setting of the
                          facts of a particular case, said Lord Morris in Herrington v. British
                          Railways Board [(1972) 2 WLR 537 : 1972 AC 877 (HL) [Sub nom
                          British Railways Board v. Herrington, (1972) 1 All ER 749 (HL)]] .
                          Circumstantial flexibility, one additional or different fact may make
                          a world of difference between conclusions in two cases.”




http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                           31


                                40. In view of the legal principle settled in the matter of
                          “binding precedent”, now, this Court is bound by the legal
                          principles settled by the Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme
                          Court of India in the “Umadevi Case”.        Admittedly, there is no
                          other subsequent Constitution Bench judgment in respect of the
                          subject of regularization and permanent absorption.         The last
                          judgment rendered by the Constitution Bench in the subject matter
                          is “Umadevi Case”.      Thus, the legal principles settled by the
                          Constitution Bench in “Umadevi Case” are of “binding precedent”
                          or to be followed as “binding precedent”.      Thus, the facts and
                          circumstances of the present writ petition has to be considered only
                          in the light of the principles laid down by the Constitution Bench.
                          All other judgments subsequently passed by the Hon'ble Supreme
                          Court of India may have certain distinctions far and against.
                          However, these judgments are to be interpreted only based on the
                          facts and circumstances prevailing in that particular case and
                          therefore, this Court cannot consider those judgments delivered on
                          a particular facts in relation to that particular case. However, the
                          legal principles are to be considered in relation to the facts and
                          circumstances of the present case on hand.

                                41. Let us look into the basic principles enunciated by the
                          Constitution Bench in the matter of regularization and permanent
                          absorption.   Paragraph (5) of the “Umadevi Case” is extracted
                          hereunder:

                          “5. This Court has also on occasions issued directions which could
                          not be said to be consistent with the constitutional scheme of public
                          employment. Such directions are issued presumably on the basis of


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            32


                          equitable considerations or individualisation of justice. The question
                          arises, equity to whom? Equity for the handful of people who have
                          approached the court with a claim, or equity for the teeming millions
                          of this country seeking employment and seeking a fair opportunity
                          for competing for employment? When one side of the coin is
                          considered, the other side of the coin has also to be considered and
                          the way open to any court of law or justice, is to adhere to the law
                          as laid down by the Constitution and not to make directions, which
                          at times, even if do not run counter to the constitutional scheme,
                          certainly tend to water down the constitutional requirements. It is
                          this conflict that is reflected in these cases referred to the
                          Constitution Bench”


                                42. This Court wants to look into the very findings made by
                          the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the above said paragraph (5),
                          the Apex Court has conceded that the Hon'ble Supreme Court of
                          India had also on occasions, issued directions, which could not be
                          said to be consistent with the Constitutional schemes of public
                          employment. Such directions are issued presumably on the basis
                          of equitable considerations or individualisation of justice.      The
                          Hon'ble Supreme Court of India raised a question that equity to
                          whom? Equity for the handful of people who have approached the
                          Court with the claim, or equity for the teeming millions of this
                          Country seeking employment and seeking a fair opportunity for
                          competing for employment? When one side of the coin is
                          considered, the other side of the coin has also to be considered and
                          the way open to any Court of law or justice, is to adhere to the law
                          as laid down by the Constitution and not to make directions, which
                          at times, even if do not run counter to the constitutional scheme,


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                             33


                          certainly tend to water down the constitutional requirements. It is
                          this Conflict that reflected in these cases referred to the Constitution
                          Bench.

                                43. This Court is able to vitualize the strong concern recorded
                          by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The concern raised by the
                          Constitution Bench is that by granting relief to a handful of people,
                          the large sector of meritorious youth of this great nation cannot be
                          deprived of their constitutional rights.     Under this pretext, the
                          Constitution Bench commenced its consideration in “Umadevi
                          Case”.   Thus, the very enumeration in the above paragraph is
                          crystal clear that the Constitution Bench has laid down the principle
                          in the matter of regularization and permanent absorption and the
                          idea of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has to stop the practice
                          of appointing employees, through back door on extraneous
                          consideration by showing favoritism and nepotism.

                                44.Further, Paragraph (10) of the “Umadevi Case” is
                          extracted hereunder:

 
“10. When these matters came up before a Bench of two
                          Judges, the learned Judges referred the cases to a Bench of three
                          Judges. The order of reference is reported in 
Secy., State of
                          Karnataka v. Umadevi
 (1) [(2004) 7 SCC 132 : 2004 SCC (L&S) 935
                          : (2003) 9 Scale 187] . This Court noticed that in the matter of
                          regularisation of ad hoc employees, there were conflicting decisions
                          by three-Judge Benches of this Court and by two-Judge Benches
                          and hence the question required to be considered by a larger
                          Bench. When the matters came up before a three-Judge Bench, the
                          Bench in turn felt that the matter required consideration by a
                          Constitution Bench in view of the conflict and in the light of the


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                           34


                          arguments raised by the Additional Solicitor General.
 
The order of
                          reference is reported in 
Secy., State of Karnataka v. Umadevi
 (2)
                          [(2006) 4 SCC 44 : (2003) 10 Scale 388] . It appears to be proper to
                          quote that order of reference at this stage. It reads: (SCC p. 45,
                          paras 1-5)

                          “1.
 
Apart from the conflicting opinions between the three-Judge
                          Bench decisions in 
Ashwani Kumar v. State of Bihar
 [(1997) 2 SCC
                          1 : 1997 SCC (L&S) 465 : 1996 Supp (10) SCR 120] , State of
                          Haryana v. Piara Singh [(1992) 4 SCC 118 : 1992 SCC (L&S) 825 :


                          (1992) 21 ATC 403 : (1992) 3 SCR 826] and Dharwad Distt. PWD
                          Literate Daily Wage Employees Assn. v. State of Karnataka [(1990)
                          2 SCC 396 : 1990 SCC (L&S) 274 : (1990) 12 ATC 902 : (1990) 1
                          SCR 544] on the one hand and State of H.P. v. Suresh Kumar
                          Verma [(1996) 7 SCC 562 : 1996 SCC (L&S) 645 : (1996) 33 ATC
                          336 : AIR 1996 SC 1565 : (1996) 1 SCR 972] , State of Punjab v.

 
Surinder Kumar [(1992) 1 SCC 489 : 1992 SCC (L&S) 345 : (1992)
                          19 ATC 500 : AIR 1992 SC 1593 : 1991 Supp (3) SCR 553] and
                          B.N. Nagarajan v. State of Karnataka [(1979) 4 SCC 507 : 1980
                          SCC (L&S) 4 : (1979) 3 SCR 937] on the other, which have been
                          brought out in one of the judgments under appeal of the Karnataka
                          High Court in 
State of Karnataka v. H. Ganesh Rao
 [(2001) 4 Kant
                          LJ 466 (DB)] , decided on 1-6-2001 the learned Additional Solicitor
                          General urged that the scheme for regularisation is repugnant to
                          
Articles 16(4)
, 309
, 320
 and 
335
 of the Constitution and, therefore,
                          these cases are required to be heard by a Bench of five learned
                          Judges (Constitution Bench).




                          2. On the other hand, Mr M.C. Bhandare, learned Senior Counsel,
                          appearing for the employees urged that such a scheme for

http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            35


                          regularisation is consistent with the provisions of 
Articles 14
 and 
21

                          of the Constitution.



                          3. Mr V. Lakshmi Narayan, learned counsel appearing in CCs Nos.
                          109-498 of 2003, has filed the GO dated 19-7-2002 and submitted
                          that the orders have already been implemented.



                          4. After having found that there is conflict of opinion between the
                          three-Judge Bench decisions of this Court, we are of the view that
                          these cases are required to be heard by a Bench of five learned
                          Judges.



                          5. Let these matters be placed before the Hon'ble the Chief Justice
                          for appropriate orders.”

                          We are, therefore, called upon to resolve this issue here. We have to
                          lay down the law. We have to approach the question as a
                          constitutional court should.”


                                45. The above said Paragraph (10), stipulates that there were
                          conflicting decisions by three-Judge Benches of this Court and by
                          two-Judge Benches of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and
                          therefore, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has considered that
                          the question required to be considered by a larger Bench.        It is
                          further observed that when the matters came up before a three-
                          Judge Bench, the Bench in turn felt that the matter required
                          consideration by a Constitution Bench in view of the conflict and in
                          the light of the arguments raised by the Additional Solicitor General.
                          In the reference made by the Hon'ble three-Judge Bench itself
                          decided that the scheme for regularisation is repugnant to 
Articles
                          16(4)
, 309
, 320
 and 
335
 of the Constitution and, therefore, these
                          cases are required to be heard by a Bench of five learned


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                              36


                          Judges(Constitution Bench).

                                46. In paragraph (11) of the “Umadevi Case”, it is stated
                          that in addition to the equality clause represented by 
Article 14
 of
                          the Constitution, 
Article 16
 has specifically provided for equality of
                          opportunity in matters of public employment.        Buttressing these
                          fundamental rights, 
Article 309
 provides that subject to the
                          provisions of the Constitution, Acts of the legislature may regulate
                          the recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to
                          public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union
                          or of a State.

                                47. In view of the interpretation placed on 
Article 12
 of the
                          Constitution by this Court, obviously, these principles also govern
                          the instrumentalities that come within the purview of 
Article 12
 of
                          the Constitution. With a view to make the procedure for selection
                          fair, the Constitution by 
Article 315
 has also created a Public
                          Service    Commission   for   the   Union   and   the   Public   Service
                          Commissions for the States. 
Article 320
 deals with the functions of
                          the Public Service Commissions and mandates consultation with the
                          Commission on all matters relating to methods of recruitment to civil
                          services and for civil posts and other related matters. As a part of
                          the affirmative action recognised by 
Article 16
 of the Constitution,
                          
Article 335
 provides for special consideration in the matter of claims
                          of the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes for
                          employment.

                                48.Further, Paragraph (12) of the“Umadevi Case” reads as
                          follows:

                          “12. In spite of this scheme, there may be occasions when the
                          sovereign State or its instrumentalities will have to employ persons,


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            37


                          in posts which are temporary, on daily wages, as additional hands
                          or taking them in without following the required procedure, to
                          discharge the duties in respect of the posts that are sanctioned and
                          that are required to be filled in terms of the relevant procedure
                          established by the Constitution or for work in temporary posts or
                          projects that are not needed permanently. This right of the Union or
                          of the State Government cannot but be recognised and there is
                          nothing in the Constitution which prohibits such engaging of
                          persons temporarily or on daily wages, to meet the needs of the
                          situation. But the fact that such engagements are resorted to,
                          cannot be used to defeat the very scheme of public employment.
                          Nor can a court say that the Union or the State Governments do not
                          have the right to engage persons in various capacities for a duration
                          or until the work in a particular project is completed. Once this right
                          of the Government is recognised and the mandate of the
                          constitutional requirement for public employment is respected, there
                          cannot be much difficulty in coming to the conclusion that it is
                          ordinarily not proper for the Courts whether acting under 
Article
                          226
 of the Constitution or under 
Article 32
 of the Constitution, to
                          direct absorption in permanent employment of those who have been
                          engaged without following a due process of selection as envisaged
                          by the constitutional scheme.”


                                49. The spirit of Paragraph (12) of the “Umadevi Case”
                          judgment is that the temporary engagements like daily wage
                          appointments, consolidated pay appointments and temporary
                          appointments and engagements are resorted to, cannot be used to
                          defeat the very scheme of public employment. Nor can a Court say
                          that the Union or the State Governments do not have the right to


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                             38


                          engage persons in various capacities for a duration or until the
                          work in a particular project is completed.    Once this right of the
                          Government is recognised and the mandate of the constitutional
                          requirement for public employment is respected, there cannot be
                          much difficulty in coming to the conclusion that it is ordinarily not
                          proper for the Courts, whether acting under 
Article 226
 of the
                          Constitution or under 
Article 32
 of the Constitution, to direct
                          absorption in permanent employment of those who have been
                          engaged without following a due process of selection as envisaged
                          by the constitutional scheme.       Thus, it is made clear by the
                          Constitutional Bench that regular recruitment rules in force,
                          followed      scrupulously   by   the   competent   authorities   and
                          engagements on temporary basis cannot be resorted or the same
                          cannot lead to permanent absorption or regularization. Further, it is
                          stated that the Government is entitled to appoint the persons on
                          daily wages/consolidated pay/temporary basis, if a Government is
                          of the opinion that a project has to be implemented or a special
                          works to be carried out, then they are at liberty to do so, by
                          engaging the temporary employees.          Such being the concept
                          accepted by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, no doubt, a mere
                          appointment on temporary/daily wage basis cannot constitute a
                          right for the employees to claim regularization or permanent
                          absorption.

                                50. Further, Paragraph (13) of the “Umadevi Case”
                          judgment is extracted hereunder:

                          “13. What is sought to be pitted against this approach, is the so-
                          called equity arising out of giving of temporary employment or
                          engagement on daily wages and the continuance of such persons in


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                             39


                          the engaged work for a certain length of time. Such considerations
                          can have only a limited role to play, when every qualified citizen
                          has a right to apply for appointment, the adoption of the concept of
                          rule of law and the scheme of the Constitution for appointment to
                          posts. It cannot also be forgotten that it is not the role of the courts
                          to   ignore,   encourage    or   approve    appointments     made    or
                          engagements given outside the constitutional scheme. In effect,
                          orders based on such sentiments or approach would result in
                          perpetuating illegalities and in the jettisoning of the scheme of
                          public employment adopted by us while adopting the Constitution.
                          The approving of such acts also results in depriving many of their
                          opportunity to compete for public employment. We have, therefore,
                          to consider the question objectively and based on the constitutional
                          and statutory provisions. 
In this context, we have also to bear in
                          mind the exposition of law by a Constitution Bench in 
State of
                          Punjab v. Jagdip Singh
 [(1964) 4 SCR 964 : AIR 1964 SC 521] . It
                          was held therein: (SCR pp. 971-72)
                          “In our opinion where a government servant has no right to a post
                          or to a particular status, though an authority under the Government
                          acting beyond its competence had purported to give that person a
                          status which it was not entitled to give he will not in law be deemed
                          to have been validly appointed to the post or given the particular
                          status.”


                                51. This Court cannot omit the powerful statement made by
                          the Constitution Bench in respect of providing equal opportunity
                          and in respect of implementing the equality clause enshrined under
                          
Article 14
 
& 16
 of the Constitution. In the above said paragraph
                          (13), the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has emphasized that it


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                             40


                          cannot also be forgotten that it is not the role of the Courts to ignore,
                          encourage or approve appointments made or engagements given
                          outside the constitutional scheme. In effect, orders based on such
                          sentiments or approach would result in perpetuating illegalities and
                          in the jettisoning of the scheme of public employment adopted by
                          us, while adopting the Constitution. We, the people of India, while
                          adopting the Constitution.

 
52. The approving of such acts also results in depriving
                          many of their opportunity to compete for public employment. The
                          Constitution Bench of “Umadevi Case”, considered the proposition
                          of law 
laid down by
 the previous Constitution Bench in the case of
                          
State of Punjab Vs. Jagdip Singh
, reported in [AIR (1964) SC
                          521].
 
The earlier Constitution Bench in the case of 
State of
                          Punjab Vs. Jagdip Singh
, held that where a Government Servant
                          has no right to a post or to a particular status, though an authority
                          under the Government acting beyond its competence had purported
                          to give that person a status which it was not entitled to give he will
                          not in law be deemed to have been validly appointed to the post or
                          given the particular status.


                                  53. In paragraph (14) of the “Umadevi Case” judgment, the
                          Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has elaborately discussed about
                          various orders of the Courts either interim orders or final orders
                          which were brought to the notice of the Constitution Bench. The
                          Hon'ble Supreme Court of India came to the conclusion that those
                          orders more or less was the issue of directions for continuation or
                          absorption without referring to the legal position obtaining. It was
                          brought to the notice of this Court that chaos has been created by
                          such orders without reference to the legal principles and it is time


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            41


                          that this Court settled the law once and for all so that in case the
                          Court finds that such orders should not be made, the Courts,
                          especially, the High Courts would be precluded from issuing such
                          directions or passing such orders.

                                54. The very arguments advanced by the learned counsel for
                          the State of Karnataka is that a chaos was created on account of
                          various contradicting orders passed by the High Courts in the
                          matter of regularization or permanent absorption in order to settle
                          the legal principles.    The learned counsel urged the Hon'ble
                          Supreme Court of India to take note of the fact that there is a chaos
                          prevailing in respect of the regularization and permanent absorption
                          of the temporary/daily wages employees and brought to the notice
                          of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India that the High Courts would
                          be precluded from issuing any such directions or passing such
                          orders in contrary to the legal principles in the matters of
                          regularization or permanent absorption or appointment.           The
                          observation made in this regard is that bypassing of the
                          Constitutional scheme cannot be perpetuated by the passing of
                          orders without dealing with and deciding the validity of such orders
                          on the touchstone of Constitutionality.

                                55. Let us come to paragraph (20) of the “Umadevi Case”
                          judgment which is extracted hereunder:

 
“20. The decision in Dharwad Distt. 
PWD Literate Daily Wage
                          Employees Assn. v. State of Karnataka
 [(1990) 2 SCC 396 : 1990
                          SCC (L&S) 274 : (1990) 12 ATC 902 : (1990) 1 SCR 544] dealt with
                          a scheme framed by the State of Karnataka, though at the instance
                          of the Court. The scheme was essentially relating to the application
                          of the concept of equal pay for equal work but it also provided for


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                              42


                          making permanent, or what it called regularisation, without keeping
                          the distinction in mind, of employees who had been appointed ad
                          hoc, casually, temporarily or on daily-wage basis. In other words,
                          employees    who      had   been   appointed   without following   the
                          procedure established by law for such appointments. This Court, at
                          the threshold, stated that it should individualise justice to suit a
                          given situation. With respect, it is not possible to accept the
                          statement, unqualified as it appears to be. This Court is not only the
                          constitutional court, it is also the highest court in the country, the
                          final court of appeal. By virtue of 
Article 141
 of the Constitution,
                          what this Court lays down is the law of the land. Its decisions are
                          binding on all the courts. Its main role is to interpret the
                          constitutional and other statutory provisions bearing in mind the
                          fundamental philosophy of the Constitution. We have given unto
                          ourselves a system of governance by rule of law. The role of the
                          Supreme Court is to render justice according to law. As one jurist
                          put it, the Supreme Court is expected to decide questions of law for
                          the country and not to decide individual cases without reference to
                          such principles of law. Consistency is a virtue. Passing orders not
                          consistent with its own decisions on law, is bound to send out
                          confusing signals and usher in judicial chaos. Its role, therefore, is
                          really to interpret the law and decide cases coming before it,
                          according to law.
 Orders which are inconsistent with the legal
                          conclusions arrived at by the court in the selfsame judgment not
                          only create confusion but also tend to usher in arbitrariness
                          highlighting the statement, that equity tends to vary with the
                          Chancellor's foot.”




http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            43


 
56. The decision in the case of Dharwad Distt. 
PWD
                          Literate    Daily   Wage     Employees       Assn.    Vs.   State    of
                          Karnataka
, reported in (1990) 2 SCC 396, was considered in
                          the above paragraph. It is observed that the role of the Court to
                          interpret the law and decide cases coming before it, according to
                          law.   Orders which are inconsistent with the legal conclusions
                          arrived at by the Court in the self same judgment not only create
                          confusion but also tend to usher in arbitrariness highlighting the
                          statement, that equity tends to vary with the Chancellor's foot.


                                 57. As one Jurist put it, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India
                          has accepted the decision, the question of law for the country and
                          not to decide individual cases without reference to such principles
                          of law. Consistency is a virtue. Passing orders not consistent with
                          its own decisions on law, is bound to send out confusing signals
                          and result in judicial chaos. The observation made in this regard
                          are certainly to be followed by all the Courts across the Country.

                                 58. 
In paragraph (40) of the Judgment, the Apex Court
                          referred the spirit of 
Kesavananda Bharati Vs. State of Kerala
,
                          reported in (1973) 4 SCC 225,          the Court held that 
Article 14
 
&
                          16
 which was described as a facet of 
Article 14
 is part of the basic
                          structure of the Constitution.
 
In the case of 
Indra Sawhney Vs.
                          Union of India
, reported in (2000) 1 SCC 168
, 
the said decision

                          was reiterated how neither the Parliament nor the legislature could
                          transgress the basic feature of the Constitution, namely, the
                          principle of equality enshrined in 
Article 14
 of which 
Article 16(1)
 is
                          a facet.


                                 59. 
In paragraph (41), the earlier decision in the above said
                          case of 
Indra Sawhney Vs. Union of India
, reported in (2000)


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                             44


                          1 SCC 168, it is held that equality and equal opportunity is a basis
                          feature of our Constitution, has explained the exultant position of
                          
Articles 14
 and 
16
 of the Constitution in the scheme of things.


 
60. The judgment of the another Constitution Bench in the
                          case of 
D.C.Wadhwa(Dr.) Vs. State of Bihar
, reported in
                          (1987) 1 SCC 378 and the relevant paragraph (3) is extracted
                          hereunder:


                                “3.The rule of law constitutes the core of our Constitution and
                          it is the essence of the rule of law that the exercise of the power by
                          the State whether it be the legislature or the executive or any other
                          authority should be within the constitutional limitations and if any
                          practice is adopted by the executive which is in flagrant and
                          systematic violation of its constitutional limitations, Petitioner 1 as a
                          member of the public would have sufficient interest to challenge
                          such practice by filing a writ petition and it would be the
                          constitutional duty of this Court to entertain the writ petition and
                          adjudicate upon the validity of such practice”

                                61. Let us now look into the way in which the Constitution
                          Bench has arrived the conclusion in the matter of regularization and
                          permanent absorption in “Umadevi Case” and the relevant
                          paragraphs (43) to (50), which all are extracted hereunder:

                                “43. Thus, it is clear that adherence to the rule of equality in
                          public employment is a basic feature of our Constitution and since
                          the rule of law is the core of our Constitution, a court would
                          certainly be disabled from passing an order upholding a violation of
                          
Article 14
 or in ordering the overlooking of the need to comply with
                          the requirements of 
Article 14
 read with 
Article 16
 of the
                          Constitution. Therefore, consistent with the scheme for public


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                             45


                          employment, this Court while laying down the law, has necessarily
                          to hold that unless the appointment is in terms of the relevant rules
                          and after a proper competition among qualified persons, the same
                          would not confer any right on the appointee. If it is a contractual
                          appointment, the appointment comes to an end at the end of the
                          contract, if it were an engagement or appointment on daily wages or
                          casual basis, the same would come to an end when it is
                          discontinued. Similarly, a temporary employee could not claim to be
                          made permanent on the expiry of his term of appointment. It has
                          also to be clarified that merely because a temporary employee or a
                          casual wage worker is continued for a time beyond the term of his
                          appointment, he would not be entitled to be absorbed in regular
                          service or made permanent, merely on the strength of such
                          continuance, if the original appointment was not made by following
                          a due process of selection as envisaged by the relevant rules. It is
                          not open to the court to prevent regular recruitment at the instance
                          of temporary employees whose period of employment has come to
                          an end or of ad hoc employees who by the very nature of their
                          appointment, do not acquire any right. The High Courts acting
                          under 
Article 226
 of the Constitution, should not ordinarily issue
                          directions for absorption, regularisation, or permanent continuance
                          unless the recruitment itself was made regularly and in terms of the
                          constitutional scheme. Merely because an employee had continued
                          under cover of an order of the court, which we have described as
                          “litigious employment” in the earlier part of the judgment, he would
                          not be entitled to any right to be absorbed or made permanent in
                          the service. In fact, in such cases, the High Court may not be
                          justified in issuing interim directions, since, after all, if ultimately


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            46


                          the employee approaching it is found entitled to relief, it may be
                          possible for it to mould the relief in such a manner that ultimately
                          no prejudice will be caused to him, whereas an interim direction to
                          continue his employment would hold up the regular procedure for
                          selection or impose on the State the burden of paying an employee
                          who is really not required. The courts must be careful in ensuring
                          that they do not interfere unduly with the economic arrangement of
                          its affairs by the State or its instrumentalities or lend themselves
                          the instruments to facilitate the bypassing of the constitutional and
                          statutory mandates.

                                44. The concept of “equal pay for equal work” is different
                          from the concept of conferring permanency on those who have been
                          appointed on ad hoc basis, temporary basis, or based on no
                          process of selection as envisaged by the rules. This Court has in
                          various decisions applied the principle of equal pay for equal work
                          and has laid down the parameters for the application of that
                          principle. The decisions are rested on the concept of equality
                          enshrined in our Constitution in the light of the directive principles
                          in that behalf. But the acceptance of that principle cannot lead to a
                          position where the court could direct that appointments made
                          without following the due procedure established by law, be deemed
                          permanent or issue directions to treat them as permanent. Doing so,
                          would be negation of the principle of equality of opportunity. The
                          power to make an order as is necessary for doing complete justice
                          in any cause or matter pending before this Court, would not
                          normally be used for giving the go-by to the procedure established
                          by law in the matter of public employment. Take the situation
                          arising in the cases before us from the State of Karnataka. Therein,


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            47


                          after Dharwad decision [(1990) 2 SCC 396 : 1990 SCC (L&S) 274 :

                          (1990) 12 ATC 902 : (1990) 1 SCR 544] the Government had issued
                          repeated directions and mandatory orders that no temporary or ad
                          hoc employment or engagement be given. Some of the authorities
                          and departments had ignored those directions or defied those
                          directions and had continued to give employment, specifically
                          interdicted by the orders issued by the executive. Some of the
                          appointing officers have even been punished for their defiance. It
                          would not be just or proper to pass an order in exercise of
                          jurisdiction under 
Article 226
 or 32 of the Constitution or in exercise
                          of power under 
Article 142
 of the Constitution permitting those
                          persons engaged, to be absorbed or to be made permanent, based
                          on their appointments or engagements. Complete justice would be
                          justice according to law and though it would be open to this Court to
                          mould the relief, this Court would not grant a relief which would
                          amount to perpetuating an illegality.



                                45. While directing that appointments, temporary or casual,
                          be regularised or made permanent, the courts are swayed by the
                          fact that the person concerned has worked for some time and in
                          some cases for a considerable length of time. It is not as if the
                          person who accepts an engagement either temporary or casual in
                          nature, is not aware of the nature of his employment. He accepts
                          the employment with open eyes. It may be true that he is not in a
                          position to bargain—not at arm's length—since he might have been
                          searching for some employment so as to eke out his livelihood and
                          accepts whatever he gets. But on that ground alone, it would not be
                          appropriate to jettison the constitutional scheme of appointment and
                          to take the view that a person who has temporarily or casually got


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            48


                          employed should be directed to be continued permanently. By
                          doing so, it will be creating another mode of public appointment
                          which is not permissible. If the court were to void a contractual
                          employment of this nature on the ground that the parties were not
                          having equal bargaining power, that too would not enable the court
                          to grant any relief to that employee. A total embargo on such casual
                          or temporary employment is not possible, given the exigencies of
                          administration and if imposed, would only mean that some people
                          who at least get employment temporarily, contractually or casually,
                          would not be getting even that employment when securing of such
                          employment brings at least some succour to them. After all,
                          innumerable citizens of our vast country are in search of
                          employment and one is not compelled to accept a casual or
                          temporary employment if one is not inclined to go in for such an
                          employment. It is in that context that one has to proceed on the
                          basis that the employment was accepted fully knowing the nature
                          of it and the consequences flowing from it. In other words, even
                          while accepting the employment, the person concerned knows the
                          nature of his employment. It is not an appointment to a post in the
                          real sense of the term. The claim acquired by him in the post in
                          which he is temporarily employed or the interest in that post cannot
                          be considered to be of such a magnitude as to enable the giving up
                          of the procedure established, for making regular appointments to
                          available posts in the services of the State. The argument that since
                          one has been working for some time in the post, it will not be just to
                          discontinue him, even though he was aware of the nature of the
                          employment when he first took it up, is not one that would enable
                          the jettisoning of the procedure established by law for public


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            49


                          employment and would have to fail when tested on the touchstone
                          of constitutionality and equality of opportunity enshrined in 
Article
                          14
 of the Constitution.



                                46. Learned Senior Counsel for some of the respondents
                          argued that on the basis of the doctrine of legitimate expectation,
                          the employees, especially of the Commercial Taxes Department,
                          should be directed to be regularised since the decisions in Dharwad
                          [(1990) 2 SCC 396 : 1990 SCC (L&S) 274 : (1990) 12 ATC 902 :

 
(1990) 1 SCR 544] , Piara Singh [(1992) 4 SCC 118 : 1992 SCC
                          (L&S) 825 : (1992) 21 ATC 403 : (
1992) 3 SCR 826] , Jacob [Jacob
                          M. Puthuparambil v. Kerala Water Authority
, (1991) 1 SCC 28 :


 
1991 SCC (L&S) 25 : (
1991) 15 ATC 697] and Gujarat Agricultural
                          University [Gujarat Agricultural University v. Rathod Labhu Bechar
,
                          (2001) 3 SCC 574 : 2001 SCC (L&S) 613] and the like, have given
                          rise to an expectation in them that their services would also be
                          regularised. The doctrine can be invoked if the decisions of the
                          administrative authority affect the person by depriving him of some
                          benefit or advantage which either (i) he had in the past been
                          permitted by the decision-maker to enjoy and which he can
                          legitimately expect to be permitted to continue to do until there have
                          been communicated to him some rational grounds for withdrawing it
                          on which he has been given an opportunity to comment; or (ii) he
                          has received assurance from the decision-maker that they will not
                          be withdrawn without giving him first an opportunity of advancing
                          reasons for contending that they should not be withdrawn.
 
[See
                          Lord Diplock in Council for Civil Services Union v. Minister of Civil
                          Service [1985 AC 374 : (1984) 3 All ER 935 : (
1984) 3 WLR 1174
                          (HL)] , National Buildings Construction Corpn. v. S. Raghunathan



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            50


                          [(1998) 7 SCC 66 : 1998 SCC (L&S) 1770] and Chanchal Goyal (Dr.)
                          v. State of Rajasthan [(2003) 3 SCC 485 : 2003 SCC (L&S) 322] .]

                          There is no case that any assurance was given by the Government
                          or the department concerned while making the appointment on
                          daily wages that the status conferred on him will not be withdrawn
                          until some rational reason comes into existence for withdrawing it.

                          The very engagement was against the constitutional scheme.
                          Though, the Commissioner of the Commercial Taxes Department
                          sought to get the appointments made permanent, there is no case
                          that at the time of appointment any promise was held out. No such
                          promise could also have been held out in view of the circulars and
                          directives issued by the Government after Dharwad decision
                          [(1990) 2 SCC 396 : 1990 SCC (L&S) 274 : (1990) 12 ATC 902 :

                          (1990) 1 SCR 544] . Though, there is a case that the State had
                          made regularisations in the past of similarly situated employees,
                          the fact remains that such regularisations were done only pursuant
                          to judicial directions, either of the Administrative Tribunal or of the
                          High Court and in some cases by this Court. Moreover, the
                          invocation of the doctrine of legitimate expectation cannot enable
                          the employees to claim that they must be made permanent or they
                          must be regularised in the service though they had not been
                          selected in terms of the rules for appointment. The fact that in
                          certain cases the court had directed regularisation of the employees
                          involved in those cases cannot be made use of to found a claim
                          based on legitimate expectation. The argument if accepted would
                          also run counter to the constitutional mandate. The argument in that
                          behalf has therefore to be rejected.



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            51


                                  47. When a person enters a temporary employment or gets
                          engagement as a contractual or casual worker and the engagement
                          is not based on a proper selection as recognised by the relevant
                          rules or procedure, he is aware of the consequences of the
                          appointment being temporary, casual or contractual in nature. Such
                          a person cannot invoke the theory of legitimate expectation for
                          being confirmed in the post when an appointment to the post could
                          be made only by following a proper procedure for selection and in
                          cases    concerned,   in   consultation   with   the   Public   Service
                          Commission. Therefore, the theory of legitimate expectation cannot
                          be successfully advanced by temporary, contractual or casual
                          employees. It cannot also be held that the State has held out any
                          promise while engaging these persons either to continue them
                          where they are or to make them permanent. The State cannot
                          constitutionally make such a promise. It is also obvious that the
                          theory cannot be invoked to seek a positive relief of being made
                          permanent in the post.



                                  48. It was then contended that the rights of the employees
                          thus appointed, under 
Articles 14
 and 
16
 of the Constitution, are
                          violated. It is stated that the State has treated the employees
                          unfairly by employing them on less than minimum wages and
                          extracting work from them for a pretty long period in comparison
                          with those directly recruited who are getting more wages or salaries
                          for doing similar work. The employees before us were engaged on
                          daily wages in the department concerned on a wage that was made
                          known to them. There is no case that the wage agreed upon was
                          not being paid. Those who are working on daily wages formed a
                          class by themselves, they cannot claim that they are discriminated


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            52


                          as against those who have been regularly recruited on the basis of
                          the relevant rules. No right can be founded on an employment on
                          daily wages to claim that such employee should be treated on a par
                          with a regularly recruited candidate, and made permanent in
                          employment, even assuming that the principle could be invoked for
                          claiming equal wages for equal work. There is no fundamental right
                          in those who have been employed on daily wages or temporarily or
                          on contractual basis, to claim that they have a right to be absorbed
                          in service. As has been held by this Court, they cannot be said to
                          be holders of a post, since, a regular appointment could be made
                          only by making appointments consistent with the requirements of
                          
Articles 14
 and 
16
 of the Constitution. The right to be treated
                          equally with the other employees employed on daily wages, cannot
                          be extended to a claim for equal treatment with those who were
                          regularly employed. That would be treating unequals as equals. It
                          cannot also be relied on to claim a right to be absorbed in service
                          even though they have never been selected in terms of the relevant
                          recruitment rules. The arguments based on 
Articles 14
 and 
16
 of
                          the Constitution are therefore overruled.



                                49. It is contended that the State action in not regularising
                          the employees was not fair within the framework of the rule of law.
                          The rule of law compels the State to make appointments as
                          envisaged by the Constitution and in the manner we have indicated
                          earlier. In most of these cases, no doubt, the employees had
                          worked for some length of time but this has also been brought
                          about by the pendency of proceedings in tribunals and courts
                          initiated at the instance of the employees. Moreover, accepting an
                          argument of this nature would mean that the State would be


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            53


                          permitted to perpetuate an illegality in the matter of public
                          employment and that would be a negation of the constitutional
                          scheme adopted by us, the people of India. It is therefore not
                          possible to accept the argument that there must be a direction to
                          make permanent all the persons employed on daily wages. When
                          the court is approached for relief by way of a writ, the court has
                          necessarily to ask itself whether the person before it had any legal
                          right to be enforced. Considered in the light of the very clear
                          constitutional scheme, it cannot be said that the employees have
                          been able to establish a legal right to be made permanent even
                          though they have never been appointed in terms of the relevant
                          rules or in adherence of 
Articles 14
 and 
16
 of the Constitution.



                                50. It is argued that in a country like India where there is so
                          much poverty and unemployment and there is no equality of
                          bargaining power, the action of the State in not making the
                          employees permanent, would be violative of 
Article 21
 of the
                          Constitution. But the very argument indicates that there are so
                          many waiting for employment and an equal opportunity for
                          competing for employment and it is in that context that the
                          Constitution as one of its basic features, has included 
Articles 14
,
                          16
 and 
309
 so as to ensure that public employment is given only in
                          a fair and equitable manner by giving all those who are qualified,
                          an opportunity to seek employment. In the guise of upholding rights
                          under 
Article 21
 of the Constitution, a set of persons cannot be
                          preferred over a vast majority of people waiting for an opportunity
                          to compete for State employment. The acceptance of the argument
                          on behalf of the respondents would really negate the rights of the
                          others conferred by 
Article 21
 of the Constitution, assuming that we


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                               54


                          are in a position to hold that the right to employment is also a right
                          coming within the purview of 
Article 21
 of the Constitution. The
                          argument that 
Article 23
 of the Constitution is breached because the
                          employment on daily wages amounts to forced labour, cannot be
                          accepted. After all, the employees accepted the employment at their
                          own volition and with eyes open as to the nature of their
                          employment. The Governments also revised the minimum wages
                          payable from time to time in the light of all relevant circumstances.
                          It also appears to us that importing of these theories to defeat the
                          basic    requirement   of   public   employment    would    defeat   the
                          constitutional scheme and the constitutional goal of equality.”


                                  62. In paragraph (43), it is clear that adherence to the rule of
                          equality in public employment is a basic feature of our Constitution
                          when it is clarified that adherence to the rule of equality in public
                          employment is a basic feature of the Constitution, certainly, no
                          person can deviate the principles in this regard and therefore,
                          appointment in accordance with the recruitment rules in force by the
                          competent authorities is the constitutional mandate and any
                          deviation to be construed as violation of the constitutional
                          principles. It is observed that if it is a contractual appointment, the
                          appointment comes to an end at the end of the contract, if it were an
                          engagement or appointment on daily wages or casual basis, the
                          same would come to an end when it is discontinued.            Similarly
                          temporary employee could not claim to be made permanent on the
                          expiry of his term of appointment. It has also to be clarified that
                          merely because a temporary employee or a casual wage worker is
                          continued for a time beyond the term of his appointment, he would
                          not be entitled to be absorbed in regular service or made


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            55


                          appointment, merely on the strength of such continuance, if the
                          original appointment was not made by following a due process of
                          selection as envisaged by the relevant rules.

                                63. It is not open to the court to prevent regular recruitment at
                          the instance of temporary employees whose period of employment
                          has come to an end or of ad hoc employees who by the very nature
                          of their appointment do not acquire any right.      The High Courts
                          acting under 
Article 226
 of the Constitution, should not ordinarily
                          issue directions for absorption, regularization, or permanent
                          continuance unless the recruitment itself was made regularly and in
                          terms of constitutional scheme.

                                64. The spirit of Paragraph (43) is applicable to the facts and
                          circumstances of the present writ petition on hand. In the present
                          writ petition, the writ petitioners were appointed on daily wage
                          basis as Nominal Muster Rolls employees. The mere continuance or
                          the length of service rendered alone cannot be a ground for
                          granting the relief of regularization. Thus, the very legal principles
                          settled by the Constitution Bench has to be fit in with the facts and
                          circumstances of the present writ petition.     Further, the Hon'ble
                          Supreme Court of India deals with the “litigious employment”. Of
                          course, the situation does not arise in the present case. The interim
                          order of Status Quo granted by this Court has not been properly
                          implemented by reinstating the petitioners in service and the
                          Contempt petition filed by the writ petitioners were also posted
                          along with the writ petition for final disposal. Thus, the concept of
                          “litigious employment” would not arise in respect of the present writ
                          petition. Therefore, the petitioners have not continued in service by
                          virtue of   the interim order of Status Quo granted by this Court.



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                             56


                          However, their services were ousted, after filing of the writ petition.

                                65. Paragraph (44) of the “Umadevi Case” judgment deals
                          with the concept of “equal pay for equal work”. Thus, it may not be
                          required to elaborate the paragraph as far as the present case on
                          hand is concerned.

                                66. Paragraph (45) of the above said judgment states that the
                          Apex Court of India held that, while directing that appointments,
                          temporary or casual, be regularized or made permanent, the Courts
                          are swayed by the fact that the person concerned has worked for
                          some time and in some cases for a considerable length of time. It is
                          not as if the person who accepts an engagement either temporary or
                          casual in nature, is not aware of the nature of his employment. He
                          accepts the employment with open eyes. It may be true that he is
                          not in a position to bargain- not at arm's length – Since he might
                          have been searching for some employment so as to eke out his
                          livelihood and accepts whatever he gets. But on that ground alone,
                          it would not be appropriate to jettison the constitutional scheme of
                          appointment and to take the view that a person who has
                          temporarily or casually got employed should be directed to be
                          continued permanently.      By doing so, it will be creating another
                          mode of public appointment which is not permissible.            A total
                          embargo of such casual or temporary employment is not possible,
                          given the exigencies of administration and if imposed, would only
                          mean that some people who at least get employment temporarily,
                          contractually   or   casually,   would   not be    getting   even   that
                          employment when securing of such employment brings at least
                          some succour to them.



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                             57


                                67. After all, innumerable citizens of our vast country are in
                          search of employment and one is not compelled to accept a casual
                          or temporary employment if one is not inclined to go in for such an
                          employment. It is in this context that one has to proceed on the
                          basis that the employment was accepted fully knowing the nature
                          of it and the consequences flowing from it. In other words, even
                          while accepting the employment, the person concerned knows the
                          nature of his employment. It is not an appointment to a post in the
                          real sense of the term. The claim acquired by him in the post in
                          which he is temporarily employed or the interest in that post cannot
                          be considered to be of such a magnitude, so as to enable the giving
                          up of the procedure established, for making regular appointments
                          to available posts in the services of the State.

                                68. In Paragraph (46) of the “Umadevi Case” judgment,
                          their Lordships held that the invocation of the doctrine of legitimate
                          expectation cannot enable the employees to claim that they must be
                          made permanent or they must be regularised in the service though
                          they had not been selected in terms of the rules for appointment.
                          The fact that in certain cases the court had directed regularization
                          of the employees involved in those cases cannot be made use of, to
                          found a claim based on legitimate expectation.      The argument if
                          accepted would also run counter to the constitutional mandate. The
                          argument in that behalf has therefore to be rejected.

                                69. Paragraph (47) of the “Umadevi Case” judgment
                          enumerates that when a person enters a temporary employment or
                          gets engagement as a contractual or casual worker and the
                          engagement is not based on a proper selection as recognised by the


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            58


                          relevant rules or procedure, he is aware of the consequences of the
                          appointment being temporary, casual or contractual in nature. Such
                          a person cannot invoke the theory of legitimate expectation for
                          being confirmed in the post when an appointment to the post could
                          be made only by following a proper procedure for selection and in
                          cases    concerned,   in   consultation   with   the   Public   Service
                          Commission. Therefore, the theory of legitimate expectation cannot
                          be successfully advanced by temporary, contractual or casual
                          employees.

                                  70. In paragraph (48) of the “Umadevi Case” Judgment, the
                          Constitution Bench considered the right of the employees thus
                          appointed, under 
Articles 14
 and 
16
 of the Constitution, are
                          violated. Even in “Umadevi Case”, those employees before the
                          Supreme Court of India were engaged on daily wages in the
                          department concerned on a daily wage that was made known to
                          them. There is no case that the wage agreed upon was not being
                          paid. Those who are working on daily wages formed a class by
                          themselves, they cannot claim that they are discriminated as
                          against those who have been regularly recruited on the basis of the
                          relevant rules. No right can be founded on an employment on daily
                          wages to claim that such employee should be treated on par with a
                          regularly recruited candidate, and made permanent in employment,
                          even assuming that the principle could be invoked for claiming
                          equal wages for equal work.      There is no fundamental right for
                          those who have been employed on daily wages or temporarily or on
                          contractual basis, to claim that they have a right to be absorbed in
                          service. As has been held by this Court, they cannot be said to be
                          holders of a post, since, a regular appointment could be made only


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                             59


                          by making appointments consistent with the requirements of
                          
Articles 14
 and 
16
 of the Constitution.

                                71. In paragraph (49), it is ruled that the rule of law compels
                          the State to make appointments as envisaged by the Constitution
                          and in the manner we have indicated by the Hon'ble Supreme Court
                          of India in the judgment of “Umadevi Case”. When the Court is
                          approached by way of a writ, the Court has necessarily to ask
                          itself whether the person before it had any legal right to be
                          enforced. Even, the Constitution Bench dealt with the 
Article 21
 of
                          the Constitution of India, in a Country like India, where there is so
                          much poverty and unemployment and there is no equality of
                          bargaining power, the action of the State in not making the
                          employees permanent, would be violative of 
Article 21
 of the
                          Constitution.   But the very argument indicates that there are so
                          many waiting for employment and an equal opportunity for
                          competing for employment and it is in that context, the Constitution
                          as one of its basic features, has included Articles 14,16 and 309 so
                          as to ensure that public employment is given only in a fair and
                          equitable manner by giving all those who are qualified, an
                          opportunity to seek employment. In the guise of upholding rights
                          under 
Article 21
 of the Constitution, a set of persons cannot be
                          preferred over a vast majority of people waiting for an opportunity
                          to compete for State employment.

                                72. Now, let us look into the important paragraph urged by
                          the learned counsel for the petitioner, i.e., paragraph (53) of the
                          Judgment of “Umadevi Case”.

                                Paragraph (53) of the Judgment is extracted hereunder:

                                “53. One aspect needs to be clarified. There may be cases


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                              60


                          where    irregular   appointments    (not   illegal   appointments)   as
                          explained in S.V. Narayanappa [(1967) 1 SCR 128 : AIR 1967 SC
                          1071] , R.N. Nanjundappa [(1972) 1 SCC 409 : (1972) 2 SCR 799]
                          and B.N. Nagarajan [(1979) 4 SCC 507 : 1980 SCC (L&S) 4 : (1979)
                          3 SCR 937] and referred to in para 15 above, of duly qualified
                          persons in duly sanctioned vacant posts might have been made
                          and the employees have continued to work for ten years or more
                          but without the intervention of orders of the courts or of tribunals.

                          The question of regularisation of the services of such employees
                          may have to be considered on merits in the light of the principles
                          settled by this Court in the cases abovereferred to and in the light
                          of this judgment. In that context, the Union of India, the State
                          Governments and their instrumentalities should take steps to
                          regularise as a one-time measure, the services of such irregularly
                          appointed, who have worked for ten years or more in duly
                          sanctioned posts but not under cover of orders of the courts or of
                          tribunals and should further ensure that regular recruitments are
                          undertaken to fill those vacant sanctioned posts that require to be
                          filled up, in cases where temporary employees or daily wagers are
                          being now employed. The process must be set in motion within six
                          months from this date. We also clarify that regularisation, if any
                          already made, but not sub judice, need not be reopened based on
                          this judgment, but there should be no further bypassing of the
                          constitutional requirement and regularising or making permanent,
                          those not duly appointed as per the constitutional scheme.”

                                  73. The above said paragraph (53) of the “Umadevi Case”
                          is a one time relief, of Course, granted by the Hon'ble Supreme
                          Court of India to mitigate the hardship, if any, caused to the


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            61


                          temporary employees.      Now, the question arises how long the
                          benefit granted   under paragraph (53) can be extended to the
                          employees and what is the interpretation of the subsequent
                          judgment by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in respect of
                          paragraph (53) of the judgment of the Constitution Bench.

                                74. No doubt, the Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme
                          Court of India, while stopping the entire irregular appointments and
                          back door appointments had taken note of the fact that certain
                          reliefs are required in respect of the employees who are already
                          regularized or in respect of those persons, a proposal is already
                          kept pending. Certainly, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India have
                          never intended to grant the relief of regularization or permanent
                          absorption in public employment contrary to the legal principles
                          settled in earlier paragraphs. Thus, paragraph (53) of the judgment
                          has to be understood harmoniously and together with the legal
                          principles settled by the Constitution Bench in earlier paragraphs.

                                75. Thus,     this Court is of an undoubted opinion that
                          paragraph (53) of the “Umadevi Case” judgment cannot be treated
                          as an isolation and it should be considered along with the other
                          legal principles settled by the Constitution Bench. Keeping in mind,
                          the legal principles settled by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in
                          earlier paragraphs, this Court is of the opinion that one time relief
                          granted by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has to be extended
                          in its real sense and the High Courts cannot travel beyond the
                          scope of the intention expressed by the Constitution Bench in
                          paragraph (53) of the Judgment.

 
76. The learned counsel for the petitioner cited the judgment
                          of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of U.P.State


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                             62


Electricity Board Vs. Pooran Chandra Pandey and Others
,
                          reported in (2007) 11 SCC 92, and the paragraph (11) of the
                          judgment is relevant and is extracted hereunder:


 
“11. Learned counsel for the appellant has relied upon the decision
                          of this Court in 
Secy., State of Karnataka v. Umadevi
 (3) [(2006) 4
                          SCC 1 : 2006 SCC (L&S) 753] and has urged that no direction for
                          regularisation can be given by the Court. In our opinion, the
                          decision in Umadevi (3) case [(2006) 4 SCC 1 : 2006 SCC (L&S)
                          753] is clearly distinguishable. The said decision cannot be applied
                          to a case where regularisation has been sought for in pursuance of
                          
Article 14
 of the Constitution.”


                                77. In the above said case, the Hon'ble Two Judges Bench
                          distinguished that case with the “Umadevi Case”.           The very
                          language used in Paragraph (11) states that “in our opinion, the
                          decision in “Umadevi Case” is clearly distinguishable. The said
                          decision cannot be applied to a case where regularization has been
                          sought for in pursuance of 
Article 14
 of the Constitution. However,
                          this Court is of the opinion that their Lordships have distinguished
                          the “Umadevi Case” in respect of the facts and circumstances that
                          the case. When their Lordships have distinguished that case, this
                          Court is of the opinion that the legal principles settled in “Umadevi
                          Case” has not been deviated by the Hon'ble Two Judges Bench of
                          the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, as it is a “binding precedent”
                          as stated by this Court in earlier paragraphs.

                                78. “Umadevi Case” being a “binding precedent” and when
                          the case was distinguished from “Umadevi Case” on factual
                          circumstances, the same cannot be applied in the present case
                          before this Court.



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            63


                                79. The judgment in the case of State of Uttaranchal and
                          another Vs. Prantiya Sinchai Avam Bandh Yogana Shramik
                          Mahaparishad, reported in (2007) 12 SCC 483 and the
                          relevant paragraph (5) is cited by the learned counsel for the
                          petitioner which is extracted hereunder:

                                “5. A writ petition was filed before the Uttaranchal High
                          Court which was dismissed by the impugned order. The High Court
                          was of the view that all the 14 workmen, in question, were working
                          on daily wages for more than six years and had completed 240
                          days in each calendar year and they ought to be regularised.
                          Accordingly, the writ petition was dismissed.”

                                80. On a perusal of the above said judgment, this Court is of
                          the opinion that the case relates to an award passed by the Labour
                          Court and an Award passed by the Labour Court under the
                          provisions of the 
Industrial Disputes Act
, cannot have any
                          relevance in respect of the Government employments made by
                          virtue of the rules framed by the State in this regard. However, the
                          Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in that case, remanded the matter
                          back for reconsideration by the High Court in the light of the legal
                          principles settled in the “Umadevi Case”. Thus, in all respects,
                          the case cannot have any application in respect of the facts and
                          circumstances of the present writ petition.

 
81. It has further cited the case of 
State of Karnataka and
                          Others Vs. M.L.Kesari and Others
, reported in (2010) 9 SCC
                          247 and the relevant paragraph (7) is extracted hereunder:


                                “7. It is evident from the above that there is an exception to
                          the general principles against “regularisation” enunciated in
                          Umadevi (3) [(2006) 4 SCC 1] , if the following conditions are


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                           64


                          fulfilled:

                          (i) The employee concerned should have worked for 10 years or
                          more in duly sanctioned post without the benefit or protection of the
                          interim order of any court or tribunal. In other words, the State
                          Government or its instrumentality should have employed the
                          employee and continued him in service voluntarily and continuously
                          for more than ten years.



                          (ii) The appointment of such employee should not be illegal, even if
                          irregular. Where the appointments are not made or continued
                          against sanctioned posts or where the persons appointed do not
                          possess the prescribed minimum qualifications, the appointments
                          will be considered to be illegal. But where the person employed
                          possessed the prescribed qualifications and was working against
                          sanctioned posts, but had been selected without undergoing the
                          process of open competitive selection, such appointments are
                          considered to be irregular.”

                                 82. 
In 
the above case
, an exception has been carved out in
                          relation to the one time relief granted in paragraph (15) of the
                          “Umadevi Case”.


                                 83. In the case of State of Rajastan and Others Vs. Daya
                          Lal and Others, reported in (2011) 2 SCC 429 and the relevant
                          paragraph (12), enumerates the settled principles in respect of
                          regularization and parity in pay, relevant in the context of the case
                          and those principles carved out in paragraph (12) of the above
                          judgment are akin to that of the legal principles settled by the
                          Constitution Bench in “Umadevi Case”.

 
84. The learned counsel for the petitioner solicited the
                          attention of this Court relying the case decided by the Hon'ble Two


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                           65


                          Judges Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of
                          
Nihal Singh and Others Vs. State of Punjab and Others
,
                          reported in (2013) 14 SCC 65 and the paragraph (31) and (33) of
                          the judgments are extracted hereunder:


 
“31. Therefore, we are of the opinion that the process of
                          selection adopted in identifying the appellants herein cannot be
                          said to be unreasonable or arbitrary in the sense that it was
                          devised to eliminate other eligible candidates. It may be worthwhile
                          to note that in Umadevi (3) case [
State of Karnataka v. Umadevi
 (3),
                          (2006) 4 SCC 1 : 2006 SCC (L&S) 753] , this Court was dealing with
                          appointments made without following any rational procedure in the
                          lower rungs of various services of the Union and the States.




                                33. It is no doubt that the assessment of the need to employ
                          a   certain   number   of   people   for   discharging   a   particular
                          responsibility of the State under the Constitution is always with the
                          executive government of the day subject to the overall control of the
                          legislature. That does not mean that an examination by a
                          constitutional court regarding the accuracy of the assessment of the
                          need is barred.”


                                85. On a plain reading of the judgment, this Court is of an
                          undoubted opinion that there is a slight deviation in respect of the
                          legal principles carved out by the Hon'ble Constitution Bench in
                          “Umadevi Case”. This Court wishes to remind the language used
                          by the Constitution Bench in paragraph (5) of “Umadevi Case”. To
                          reiterate the language used by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India
                          emphatically in paragraph (5) that this Court has also occasions to
                          issue directions which could not be said to be consisted by the
                          public employment. Such directions are issued presumably on the

http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                              66


                          basis of equitable consideration or individualization of justice. The
                          question arises, equity to whom? Equity for the handful of people
                          who have approached the Court with a claim, or equity for the
                          teeming millions of this Country seeking employment and seeking a
                          fair opportunity for competing for employment?

                                    86. In paragraph (54) of the said “Umadevi Case” judgment,
                          again the Constitution Bench reiterated that “It is also clarified that
                          those decisions which run counter to the principle settled in this
                          decision, or in which directions running counter to what we have
                          held herein, will stand denuded of their status as precedents.”

 
87. This Court has no hesitation in holding that the judgment
                          cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner in the case of 
Nihal
                          Singh and Others Vs. State of Punjab and Others
, reported
                          in (2013) 14 SCC 65, is to be considered as denuded of their
                          status as precedents. Thus, this Court is not inclined to consider
                          and follow the same.


                                    88. 
In the case of 
Amarendra Kumar Mohapatra and
                          others Vs. State of Orissa and others
, reported in (2014) 4
                          SCC 583, the Hon'ble Two Judges Bench of the Supreme Court of
                          India held that and the paragraphs (42) & (43) of the above said
                          judgment is extracted hereunder:


 
“42.The decision in Umadevi (3) case [
State of Karnataka v.
                          Umadevi
 (3), (2006) 4 SCC 1 : 2006 SCC (L&S) 753] , as noticed
                          earlier, permitted regularisation of regular appointments and not
                          illegal     appointments.
 
Question,   however,   is   whether   the
                          appointments in the instant case could be described as illegal and if
                          they were not, whether the State could be directed to regularise the
                          services of the degree-holder Junior Engineers who have worked as


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                              67


                          ad hoc Assistant Engineers for such a long period, not only on the
                          analogy of the legislative enactment for regularisation but also on
                          the principle underlying para 53 of the decision in Umadevi (3) case
                          [
State of Karnataka v. Umadevi
 (3), (2006) 4 SCC 1 : 2006 SCC
                          (L&S) 753] .


 
43.As to what would constitute an irregular appointment is
                          no longer res integra. The decision of this Court in 
State of
                          Karnataka v. M.L. Kesari
 [(2010) 9 SCC 247 : (2010) 2 SCC (L&S)
                          826] , has examined that question and explained the principle
                          regarding regularisation as enunciated in Umadevi (3) case [
State of
                          Karnataka v. Umadevi
 (3), (2006) 4 SCC 1 : 2006 SCC (L&S) 753] .


 
The decision 
in that case
 summed up the following three essentials
                          for regularisation: (1) the employees have worked for ten years or
                          more, (2) that they have so worked in a duly sanctioned post
                          without the benefit or protection of the interim order of any court or
                          tribunal, and (3) they should have possessed the minimum
                          qualification stipulated for the appointment. Subject to these three
                          requirements being satisfied, even if the appointment process did
                          not involve open competitive selection, the appointment would be
                          treated   irregular   and   not   illegal   and   thereby   qualify   for
                          regularisation.
 
Para 7 in this regard is apposite and may be
                          extracted at this stage: (
M.L. Kesari
 case [(2010) 9 SCC 247 : (2010)
                          2 SCC (L&S) 826] , SCC p. 250)

                          “7.
 
It is evident from the above that there is an exception to the
                          general principles against ‘regularisation’ enunciated in 
Umadevi (3)
                          [State of Karnataka v. Umadevi
 (3), (2006) 4 SCC 1 : 2006 SCC
                          (L&S) 753] , if the following conditions are fulfilled:




http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                           68


                          (i) The employee concerned should have worked for 10 years or
                          more in a duly sanctioned post without the benefit or protection of
                          the interim order of any court or tribunal. In other words, the State
                          Government or its instrumentality should have employed the
                          employee and continued him in service voluntarily and continuously
                          for more than ten years.



                          (ii) The appointment of such employee should not be illegal, even if
                          irregular. Where the appointments are not made or continued
                          against sanctioned posts or where the persons appointed do not
                          possess the prescribed minimum qualifications, the appointments
                          will be considered to be illegal. But where the person employed
                          possessed the prescribed qualifications and was working against
                          sanctioned posts, but had been selected without undergoing the
                          process of open competitive selection, such appointments are
                          considered to be irregular.”


 
89. It is important to cite the case of 
SECRETARY TO
                          GOVERNMENT, SCHOOL EDUCATION DEPARTMENT,CHENNAI
                          v. R.GOVINDASWAMY AND ORS.
[ (2014) 4 SCC 769]. In
                          paragraph No.(8), the Hon'ble Supreme Court has observed as
                          follows:




 
“8.this Court in 
State of Rajasthan & Ors. v. Daya Lal & Ors.
, AIR
                          2011 SC 1193, has considered the scope of regularisation of
                          irregular or part-time appointments in all possible eventualities and
                          laid down well-settled principles relating to regularisation and
                          parity in pay relevant in the context of the issues involved therein.
                          The same are as under:




http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            69




                          “(i) The High Courts, in exercising power under 
Article 226
 of the
                          Constitution will not issue directions for regularisation, absorption
                          or   permanent    continuance,   unless    the   employees     claiming
                          regularisation had been appointed in pursuance of a regular
                          recruitment in accordance with relevant rules in an open competitive
                          process, against sanctioned vacant posts. The equality clause
                          contained in 
Articles 14
 and 
16
 should be scrupulously followed
                          and Courts should not issue a direction for regularisation of
                          services of an employee which would be violative of the
                          constitutional scheme. While something that is irregular for want of
                          compliance with one of the elements in the process of selection
                          which does not go to the root of the process, can be regularised,
                          back door entries, appointments contrary to the constitutional
                          scheme and/or appointment of ineligible candidates cannot be
                          regularised.



                          (ii) Mere continuation of service by a temporary or ad hoc or daily-

                          wage employee, under cover of some interim orders of the court,
                          would not confer upon him any right to be absorbed into service, as
                          such service would be “litigious employment”. Even temporary, ad
                          hoc or daily-wage service for a long number of years, let alone
                          service for one or two years, will not entitle such employee to claim
                          regularisation, if he is not working against a sanctioned post.
                          Sympathy and sentiment 5 Page 6 cannot be grounds for passing
                          any order of regularisation in the absence of a legal right.



                          (iii) Even where a scheme is formulated for regularisation with a
                          cut-off date (that is a scheme providing that persons who had put in
                          a specified number of years of service and continuing in

http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                           70


                          employment as on the cut-off date), it is not possible to others who
                          were appointed subsequent to the cut-off date, to claim or contend
                          that the scheme should be applied to them by extending the cut-off
                          date or seek a direction for framing of fresh schemes providing for
                          successive cut-off dates.



                          (iv) Part-time employees are not entitled to seek regularisation as
                          they are not working against any sanctioned posts. There cannot be
                          a direction for absorption, regularisation or permanent continuance
                          of part-time temporary employees.



                          (v) Part-time temporary employees in government-run institutions
                          cannot claim parity in salary with regular employees of the
                          Government on the principle of equal pay for equal work. Nor can
                          employees in private employment, even if serving full time, seek
                          parity in salary with government employees. The right to claim a
                          particular salary against the State must arise under a contract or
                          under a statute.” (Emphasis added) “

 
90. Reiterating the principles 
laid down in
 the 
Case of
                          Secretary to Government, School Education Department,
                          Chennai Vs. R.Govindaswamy and others
, reported in (2014)
                          4 SCC 769, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India emphatically ruled
                          that the High Courts, in exercising power under 
Article 226
 of the
                          Constitution of India will not issue directions for regularization,
                          absorption or permanent continuance.        Unless the employees
                          claiming regularization had been appointed in pursuance of a
                          regular recruitment in accordance with relevant rules in an open
                          competitive process against sanctioned vacant posts, the equality
                          clause contained in 
Articles 14
 and 
16
 should be scrupulously
                          followed and Courts should not issue a direction for regularization


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                           71


                          of services of an employee which would be violative of the
                          Constitutional scheme.




                          91. 
In the case of 
Nand Kumar Vs. State of Bihar and Others
,
                          reported in (2014) 5 SCC 300, paragraph (25) & (26) are
                          extracted hereunder:


 
“25.We have consciously noted the aforesaid decisions of
                          this Court. The principle as has been 
laid down in
 
Umadevi (3)
                          [State of Karnataka v. Umadevi
 (3), (2006) 4 SCC 1 : 2006 SCC
                          (L&S) 753] has also been applied in relation to the persons who
                          were working on daily wages. According to us, the daily wagers are
                          not appointees in the strict sense of the term “appointment”. They
                          do not hold a post. The scheme of alternative appointment framed
                          for regular employees of abolished organisation cannot, therefore,
                          confer a similar entitlement on the daily wagers of abolished
                          organisation to such alternative employment.
 
(See 
Avas Vikas
                          Sansthan v. Engineers Assn.
 [(2006) 4 SCC 132 : 2006 SCC (L&S)
                          613] ) Their relevance in the context of appointment arose by reason
                          of the concept of regularisation as a source of appointment.
 
After
                          Umadevi (3) [State of Karnataka v. Umadevi
 (3), (2006) 4 SCC 1 :


                          2006 SCC (L&S) 753] , their position continued to be that of daily
                          wagers. Appointment on daily-wage basis is not an appointment to
                          a post according to the rules. Usually, the projects in which the
                          daily wagers were engaged, having come to an end, their
                          appointment is necessarily terminated for want of work. Therefore,
                          the status and rights of daily wagers of a government concern are
                          not equivalent to that of a government servant and his claim to
                          permanency has to be adjudged differently.



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                           72


                                26.In these circumstances, in our considered opinion, the
                          regularisation/absorption is not a matter of course. It would depend
                          upon the facts of the case following the rules and regulations and
                          cannot be dehors the rules for such regularisation/absorption.”


 
92. Once again, this Court is of the opinion that the above
                          two paragraphs are running contrary to the legal principles settled
                          by the Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India.
                          Thus, the rules 
laid down in
 paragraph (54) of the Constitution
                          Bench to be applied in respect of 
the above case
 cited.


                                93. 
In the case of 
Malathi Das and Others, Vs. Suresh
                          and Others
, reported in (2014) 13 SCC 249 and the relevant
                          paragraph (13) is extracted hereunder:


 
“13.In   the   aforesaid   undisputed    facts   it   is   wholly
                          unnecessary for us to consider as to whether the cases of persons
                          who were awaiting regularisation on the date of the decision in
                          
Umadevi (3) [State of Karnataka v. Umadevi
 (3), (2006) 4 SCC 1 :


 
2006 SCC (L&S) 753] is required to be dealt with in accordance
                          with the conditions stipulated in para 53 of 
Umadevi (3) [State of
                          Karnataka v. Umadevi
 (3), (2006) 4 SCC 1 : 2006 SCC (L&S) 753]
                          inasmuch as the claims of the respondent employees can well be
                          decided on principles of parity.
 
Similarly placed employees having
                          been regularised by the State and in case of some of them such
                          regularisation being after the decision in 
Umadevi (3) [State of
                          Karnataka v. Umadevi
 (3), (2006) 4 SCC 1 : 2006 SCC (L&S) 753]
                          we are of the view that the stand taken by the appellants in
                          refusing regularisation to the respondents cannot be countenanced.


However, as the said stand of the appellants stems from their
                          perception and understanding of the decision in Umadevi (3) [State


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                           73


                          of 
Karnataka v. Umadevi
 (3), (2006) 4 SCC 1 : 2006 SCC (L&S) 753]
                          we do not hold them liable for contempt but make it clear that the
                          appellants and all the other competent authorities of the State will
                          now be obliged and duty-bound to regularise the services of the
                          respondents (74 in number) which will now be done forthwith and
                          in any case within a period of two months from the date of receipt
                          of this order.”


 
94. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India once again taken a
                          deviation in respect of the legal principles settled by the
                          Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India.
                          Therefore, such deviation to be held as denuded of their status as
                          precedent, as 
laid down in
 paragraph (54) of the Constitution
                          Bench.


                                 95. 
In the case of 
Amarkant Rai Vs. State of Bihar and
                          Others
, reported in (2015) 8 SCC 265, the Hon'ble Supreme
                          Court of India in paragraph (11) and (14) are held as follows:


 
“11.Elaborating upon the principles 
laid down in
 Umadevi (3)
                          case [(2006) 4 SCC 1 : 2006 SCC (L&S) 753] and explaining the
                          difference between irregular and illegal appointments in 
State of
                          Karnataka v. M.L. Kesari
 [(2010) 9 SCC 247 : (2010) 2 SCC (L&S)
                          826] , this Court held as under: (
M.L. Kesari
 case [(2010) 9 SCC
                          247 : (2010) 2 SCC (L&S) 826] , SCC p. 250, para 7)
                          “7. It is evident from the above that there is an exception to the
                          general principles against ‘regularisation’ enunciated in Umadevi (3)
                          [(2006) 4 SCC 1 : 2006 SCC (L&S) 753] , if the following conditions
                          are fulfilled:




                          (i) The employee concerned should have worked for 10 years or
                          more in duly sanctioned post without the benefit or protection of the


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            74


                          interim order of any court or tribunal. In other words, the State
                          Government or its instrumentality should have employed the
                          employee and continued him in service voluntarily and continuously
                          for more than ten years.



                          (ii) The appointment of such employee should not be illegal, even if
                          irregular. Where the appointments are not made or continued
                          against sanctioned posts or where the persons appointed do not
                          possess the prescribed minimum qualifications, the appointments
                          will be considered to be illegal. But where the person employed
                          possessed the prescribed qualifications and was working against
                          sanctioned posts, but had been selected without undergoing the
                          process of open competitive selection, such appointments are
                          considered to be irregular.”

                                14.Considering the facts and circumstances of the case that
                          the appellant has served the University for more than 29 years on
                          the post of night guard and that he has served the College on daily
                          wages, in the interest of justice, the authorities are directed to
                          regularise the services of the appellant retrospectively w.e.f.

                          3-1-2002 (the date on which he rejoined the post as per the
                          direction of the Registrar)."



                                96. In paragraph (14) of the above cited judgment, the
                          Hon'ble Supreme Court of India held that the appellant has served
                          in the University for more than 29 years in the post of night guard
                          and that he has served the College on daily wages, in the interest
                          of justice, the authorities are directed to regularise the services of
                          the appellant retrospectively w.e.f. 3-1-2002.

                                97. Again, in this case also, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of
                          India has deviated the principles 
laid down in
 “Umadevi Case”.



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            75


                          Thus, this Court has to derive an opinion that the decision would be
                          denuded of its status as precedents. For all these reasons, this
                          Court has to independently apply the legal principles settled by the
                          Constitution Bench in the “Umadevi Case”.



                                98. 
In the case of 
Prem Ram Vs. Managing Director,
                          Uttarakhand Pey Jal & Nirman Nigam, Dehradun and
                          Others
, reported in (2015) 11 SCC 255, undoubtedly, the
                          Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has decided the case based on the
                          facts and circumstances of the case. However, on a plain reading
                          of the judgment, this Court is of the opinion that the legal principles
                          settled by the Constitution Bench has not been considered by the
                          Hon'ble Two Judges Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India.
                          Thus, this Court is not inclined to follow the judgment for the
                          purpose of deciding the case on hand.


                                99. 
In the case of 
Surendra Kumar and Others Vs.
                          Greater Noida Industrial Development Authority and Others
,
                          reported in (2015) 14 SCC 382, while, the Supreme Court of
                          India in paragraph (13) held as follows:


 
“13.Considering the facts of the present case on the
                          touchstone 
laid down in
 Umadevi (3) case [
State of Karnataka v.
                          Umadevi
 (3), (2006) 4 SCC 1 : 2006 SCC (L&S) 753] , it will be seen
                          that the Division Bench was not right in setting aside the
                          appointment of the appellants. More so, it was nobody's case
                          challenging the appointment of the appellants. Admittedly, the
                          appellants were engaged as contractual employees from 1994 and
                          have completed more than ten years of continuous service with
                          Respondent 1. They continued in service not by the orders of the


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            76


                          Court/Tribunal, but by the decision of the respondents. The
                          appellants were regularised as per the policy decision dated
                          16-4-2003 taken by Respondent 1 and approved by the State
                          Government vide Letter dated 5-3-2008. Since the appointment of
                          the appellants were made pursuant to the policy of regularisation,
                          the High Court was not right in quashing the appointment of the
                          appellants as the same were never in question before the High
                          Court. The plea that was raised by the appellants was only to seek
                          regularisation with retrospective effect from 20-11-2002 and the
                          consequential seniority.”


 
100. In this case also, the Hon'ble Two Judges Bench of the
                          Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has taken note of the one time
                          benefit granted by the Constitution Bench in paragraph (53) of the
                          Judgment in “Umadevi Case”.            However, the legal principles
                          settled in paragraphs 5,10,12,14,20 and 43 to 50 and 54 of the
                          judgment has not been considered by their Lordships. Since the
                          legal principles enunciated in the above paragraphs of the
                          Constitution Bench has not been considered and the case was
                          decided based on the particular facts and circumstances of the
                          case, this Court is not bound to consider it as a “binding precedent”
                          as enumerated in the first portion of this Judgment. This Court has
                          earlier considered the nature of the “binding precedents” and the
                          interpretation of binding precedents as enumerated by the
                          Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the
                          recent case of 
National Insurance Co. Ltd vs Pranay Sethi and
                          Others
, reported in [JT 2017 10 SC 450] cited supra.


                                101. In all the cases cited supra, this Court is able to find out
                          that those cases by the Hon'ble Two Judges of the Hon'ble Supreme


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            77


                          Court of     India were decided based on certain facts and
                          circumstances of the case. However, all those circumstances and
                          the legal principles were well settled by the Constitution Bench in
                          “Umadevi Case”. Various paragraphs of the Constitution Bench
                          judgment as discussed above made it very clear that all the
                          circumstances arisen out of the temporary/casual/daily wages
                          employees were dealt with elaborately and a findings are provided.
                          This being the factum of the case, this Court is not inclined to follow
                          the above judgment of the Hon'ble Two Judges Bench of the
                          Hon'ble Supreme Court of India as a “binding precedent” and this
                          Court is bound by the legal principles settled by the Constitution
                          Bench in “Umadevi Case” which remains as the law of the land
                          under 
Article 141
 of the Constitution of India.

 
102. This Court is willing to cite another judgment of the
                          Hon'ble Two Judges Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in
                          the case of 
Punjab Water Supply & Sewerage Board Vs.
                          Ranjodh Singh and Others
, reported in (2007) 2 SCC Page


                          491. In the above judgment paragraph (17) & (18) are extracted
                          hereunder:

                          “17.A combined reading of the aforementioned paragraphs would
                          clearly indicate that what the Constitution Bench had in mind in
                          directing regularisation was in relation to such appointments, which
                          were irregular in nature and not illegal ones.

 
18.Distinction between irregularity and illegality is explicit. It has
                          been so pointed out in 
National Fertilizers Ltd. v. Somvir Singh

                          [(2006) 5 SCC 493 : 2006 SCC (L&S) 1152] in the following terms:


                          (SCC pp. 500-01, paras 23-25)
                          “23. The contention of the learned counsel appearing on behalf of


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                             78


                          the respondents that the appointments were irregular and not
                          illegal, cannot be accepted for more than one reason. They were
                          appointed only on the basis of their applications. The Recruitment
                          Rules were not followed. Even the Selection Committee had not
                          been properly constituted. In view of the ban on employment, no
                          recruitment was permissible in law. The reservation policy adopted
                          by the appellant had not been maintained. Even cases of minorities
                          had not been given due consideration.



 
24. The Constitution Bench thought of directing regularisation of the
                          services only of those employees whose appointments were
                          irregular as explained in 
State of Mysore v. S.V. Narayanappa
 [AIR
                          1967 SC 1071 : (
1967) 1 SCR 128] , R.N. Nanjundappa v. T.
                          Thimmiah
 [(
1972) 1 SCC 409] and B.N. Nagarajan v. State of
                          Karnataka
 [(1979) 4 SCC 507 : 1980 SCC (L&S) 4] wherein this
                          Court observed: [Umadevi (3) case [(2006) 4 SCC 1 : 2006 SCC
                          (L&S) 753] , SCC p. 24, para 16]

                          ‘16.
 
In 
B.N. Nagarajan v. State of Karnataka
 [(1979) 4 SCC 507 :


                          1980 SCC (L&S) 4] this Court clearly held that the words “regular”
                          or “regularisation” do not connote permanence and cannot be
                          construed so as to convey an idea of the nature of tenure of
                          appointments. They are terms calculated to condone any procedural
                          irregularities and are meant to cure only such defects as are
                          attributable to methodology followed in making the appointments.’


 
25. Judged by the standards 
laid down by
 this Court in the
                          aforementioned decisions, the appointments of the respondents are
                          illegal.
 
They do not, thus, have any legal right to continue in
                          service.”



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                           79


                          (See also 
State of M.P. v. Yogesh Chandra Dubey
 [(2006) 8 SCC
                          67 : 2006 
SCC (L&S) 1797] and State of M.P. v. Lalit Kumar Verma

                          [(2007) 1 SCC 575 : (2006) 12 Scale 642] .)”


                                103. The Hon'ble Two Judges Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme
                          Court of India has dealt with the interpretation of paragraphs 16,
                          17, 19 and 22 of “Umadevi Case” and the paragraphs (16), (17),
                          (19) and (22) are extracted hereunder:

                                “16. 
In 
B.N. Nagarajan v. State of Karnataka
 [(1979) 4 SCC
                          507 : 1980 SCC (L&S) 4 : (1979) 3 SCR 937] this Court clearly held
                          that the words “regular” or “regularisation” do not connote
                          permanence and cannot be construed so as to convey an idea of
                          the nature of tenure of appointments. They are terms calculated to
                          condone any procedural irregularities and are meant to cure only
                          such defects as are attributable to methodology followed in making
                          the appointments. This Court emphasised that when rules framed
                          under 
Article 309
 of the Constitution are in force, no regularisation
                          is permissible in exercise of the executive powers of the Government
                          under 
Article 162
 of the Constitution in contravention of the rules.


                          These decisions and the principles recognised therein have not
                          been dissented to by this Court and on principle, we see no reason
                          not to accept the proposition as enunciated in the above decisions.
                          We have, therefore, to keep this distinction in mind and proceed on
                          the basis that only something that is irregular for want of
                          compliance with one of the elements in the process of selection
                          which does not go to the root of the process, can be regularised and
                          that it alone can be regularised and granting permanence of
                          employment is a totally different concept and cannot be equated
                          with regularisation.



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            80


                          17. We have already indicated the constitutional scheme of public
                          employment in this country, and the executive, or for that matter the
                          court, in appropriate cases, would have only the right to regularise
                          an appointment made after following the due procedure, even
                          though a non-fundamental element of that process or procedure
                          has not been followed. This right of the executive and that of the
                          court would not extend to the executive or the court being in a
                          position to direct that an appointment made in clear violation of the
                          constitutional scheme, and the statutory rules made in that behalf,
                          can be treated as permanent or can be directed to be treated as
                          permanent.



                          19. One aspect arises. Obviously, the State is also controlled by
                          economic considerations and financial implications of any public
                          employment. The viability of the department or the instrumentality
                          of the project is also of equal concern for the State. The State works
                          out the scheme taking into consideration the financial implications
                          and the economic aspects. Can the court impose on the State a
                          financial burden of this nature by insisting on regularisation or
                          permanence in employment, when those employed temporarily are
                          not needed permanently or regularly? As an example, we can
                          envisage a direction to give permanent employment to all those who
                          are being temporarily or casually employed in a public sector
                          undertaking. The burden may become so heavy by such a direction
                          that the undertaking itself may collapse under its own weight. It is
                          not as if this had not happened. So, the court ought not to impose a
                          financial burden on the State by such directions, as such directions
                          may turn counterproductive.



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            81


 
22. With respect, it appears to us that the question whether the
                          jettisoning of the constitutional scheme of appointment can be
                          approved,    was    not   considered   or   decided.   The   distinction
                          emphasised in 
R.N. Nanjundappa v. T. Thimmiah
 [(1972) 1 SCC
                          409 : (1972) 2 SCR 799] was also not kept in mind. The Court
                          appears to have been dealing with a scheme for “equal pay for
                          equal work” and in the process, without an actual discussion of the
                          question, had approved a scheme put forward by the State,
                          prepared obviously at the direction of the Court, to order permanent
                          absorption of such daily-rated workers. With respect to the learned
                          judges, the decision cannot be said to lay down any law, that all
                          those engaged on daily wages, casually, temporarily, or when no
                          sanctioned post or vacancy existed and without following the rules
                          of selection, should be absorbed or made permanent though not at
                          a stretch, but gradually. If that were the ratio, with respect, we have
                          to disagree with it.”


                                104. 
In the case of 
Post Master General, Kolkata and
                          Others Vs. Tutu Das(Dutta
), reported in (2007) 5 SCC 317,
                          paragraphs (5) & (18) are relevant and the same are extracted
                          hereunder:


                                “5.Whereas pursuant to the said direction, although the case
                          of Niva Ghosh was allegedly considered, her case was not,
                          whereupon a contempt petition was filed. In the said contempt
                          proceedings, a stand was taken by the appellant that she had not
                          completed a period of 240 days in a year before the said cut-off
                          date. The said contempt petition was dismissed with liberty to the

http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                              82


                          respondent to file a fresh original application. Pursuant to the said
                          observations, the respondent filed an application before the Central
                          Administrative Tribunal, Calcutta Bench, Calcutta which was
                          marked as OA No. 484 of 2002.

                                18.There are two distinctive features in the present case,
                          which are:



                          (i) Equality is a positive concept. Therefore, it cannot be invoked
                          where any illegality has been committed or where no legal right is
                          established.



                          (ii) According to the appellant the respondent having completed 240
                          days, does not fulfil the requisite criteria. A disputed question of
                          fact has been raised. The High Court did not come to a positive
                          finding that she had worked for more than 240 days in a year.”


                                105. 
In the case of 
C.Balachandran and Others Vs. State
                          of Kerala and Others
, reported in (2009) 1 SCC (L& S) 610,
                          wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India interpreted the scope of
                          paragraph 153 of “Umadevi Case” and the paragraphs (17) & (18)
                          of 
the said judgment
 and the same is extracted hereunder:


 
“17.     Dr.   Pillay,   however,   strongly   relied   upon   the
                          observations made in Para 53 in Umadevi [(2006) 4 SCC 1 : 2006
                          SCC (L&S) 753] which reads as under: (SCC p. 42, para 53)
                          “53. One aspect needs to be clarified. There may be cases where
                          irregular appointments (not illegal appointments) as explained in
                          
State of Mysore v. S.V. Narayanappa
 [AIR 1967 SC 1071 : (
1967) 1
                          SCR 128] , R.N. Nanjundappa v. T. Thimmiah
 [(
1972) 1 SCC 409]
                          and B.N. Nagarajan v. State of Karnataka
 [(1979) 4 SCC 507 :


 
1980 SCC (L&S) 4] and referred to in para 15 above, of duly
                          qualified persons in duly sanctioned vacant posts might have been

http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                              83


                          made and the employees have continued to work for ten years or
                          more but without the intervention of orders of the courts or of
                          tribunals. The question of regularisation of the services of such
                          employees may have to be considered on merits in the light of the
                          principles settled by this Court in the cases abovereferred to and in
                          the light of this judgment. In that context, the Union of India, the
                          State Governments and their instrumentalities should take steps to
                          regularise as a one-time measure, the services of such irregularly
                          appointed, who have worked for ten years or more in duly
                          sanctioned posts but not under cover of orders of the courts or of
                          tribunals and should further ensure that regular recruitments are
                          undertaken to fill those vacant sanctioned posts that require to be
                          filled up, in cases where temporary employees or daily wagers are
                          being now employed. The process must be set in motion within six
                          months from this date. We also clarify that regularisation, if any
                          already made, but not sub judice, need not be reopened based on
                          this judgment, but there should be no further bypassing of the
                          constitutional requirement and regularising or making permanent,
                          those    not   duly     appointed        as   per   the   constitutional
                          scheme.”(emphasis in original)

                          A case of regularisation which thus attained finality and was not
                          sub judice would not come within the purview of exception to the
                          rule contained in Para 53 of 
the said judgment
. The appellants'
                          case, thus, does not come within the purview thereof. Only those
                          cases where regularisations had already been made were not to be
                          reopened. It is not in dispute that services of the appellants were
                          terminated as far back as in 1987 and they did not question the
                          legality or validity of the said order.
 
It is only after the decision of


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            84


                          this Court in 
Jacob
 case [(1991) 1 SCC 28 : 1991 SCC (L&S) 25 :
                          (1991) 15 ATC 697] that representations were filed. Such
                          representations were rejected both by the Kerala Water Authority
                          as also the State of Kerala.


 
18. The appellants, in our opinion, thus, neither in law nor in
                          equity were entitled to be reinstated in service. The decision of this
                          Court in 
Jacob
 case [(1991) 1 SCC 28 : 1991 SCC (L&S) 25 : (1991)
                          15 ATC 697] being not applicable to the case of the appellants, we
                          are bound by the 
ratio 
laid down in
 Umadevi [(2006) 4 SCC 1 :


                          2006 SCC (L&S) 753] . So far as Para 53 of the judgment of the
                          Constitution Bench in the said case is concerned, the same has
                          been considered by this Court in a large number of decisions. 
In
                          
Punjab Water Supply & Sewerage Board v. Ranjodh Singh
 [(2007) 2
                          SCC 491 : (2007) 1 SCC (L&S) 713] it was held: (SCC p. 498, para


 
15)

                          “15. The question came up for consideration before a Constitution
                          Bench of this Court in 
State of Karnataka v. Umadevi
 (3) [(2006) 4
                          SCC 1 : 2006 SCC (L&S) 753] wherein it was held that no person
                          who was temporarily or casually been employed could be directed
                          to be continued permanently.
 
It was opined that by doing so it
                          would be creating another mode of public employment which is not
                          permissible.”

                          [See 
Employees' Union v. Mineral Exploration Corpn. Ltd.
 [(2006) 6
                          SCC 310 : 2006 
SCC (L&S) 1318] , State of M.P. v. Lalit Kumar
                          Verma
 [(2007) 1 SCC 575 : (
2007) 1 SCC (L&S) 405] and Post
                          Master General v. Tutu Das (Dutta
) [(2007) 5 SCC 317 : (2007) 2
                          SCC (L&S) 179] .
]”



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                            85


                                106. When the scope of the paragraph (53) of the judgment,
                          is well enumerated by the Hon'ble Two Judges Bench of the
                          Hon'ble Supreme Court of India as cited above, this Court is not
                          inclined to consider the other judgments referred by the learned
                          counsel for the petitioner.   However, on a perusal of all these
                          judgments cited supra, this Court is of the opinion that ultimately
                          the legal principle settled in by the Constitution Bench in the
                          “Umadevi Case” is binding over the subject and the same is to be
                          followed scrupulously by all the Courts across the country and the
                          same becomes the law of the land in the matter of regularization,
                          permanent absorption and appointment.

                                107. Now, considering the facts and circumstances of the
                          case on hand, it remains that the writ petitioners were appointed as
                          daily rated employees for a particular period and, this Court has to
                          draw an inference that all the Government orders passed
                          subsequent to the Constitution Bench Judgment, if runs contrary to
                          the legal principles settled by the Constitution Bench, would become
                          invalid and the same cannot be implemented or followed. In other
                          words, it is to be noted that the Government has no authority to
                          issue any orders granting regularization, permanent absorption or
                          appointment in violation of the Constitutional schemes and in
                          violation of the recruitment rules in force.      The power of the
                          Government in this regard is certainly abrogated by the principles
                          settled by the Constitution Bench in the “Umadevi Case”. Such
                          being the factum of the case, the State Government is to be
                          precluded as well as its authority are to be regularized in respect of
                          appointing employees in contravention with the recruitment rules in
                          force and effecting appointments through back doors.



http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                             86


                                108. This Court has to place on record that the State is
                          bound to over see the appointments made in this regard illegally or
                          irregularly by the competent authorities and the same is to be
                          construed as the fraud on the Constitution and such authorities are
                          liable for prosecution under the Discipline and Appeal Rules and
                          other relevant rules. The State shall be vigilant in this regard and
                          the authorities indulging in such activities of exercising powers by
                          issuing illegal or irregular appointments are to be booked under the
                          Discipline and Appeal Rules.      No leniency can be shown by the
                          State in this regard, since these all are the Constitutional principles
                          required for the State to be followed and the State being a modal
                          employer, has to implement the Constitutional perspectives and the
                          principles scrupulously and without any deviation.

                                109. The learned counsel for the petitioner contended that in
                          paragraph (15) of        the judgment in “Umadevi Case”, the
                          Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India held that
                          a distinction between regularisation and conferment of permanent
                          status in service jurisprudence has to be drawn. This Court is of the
                          opinion that the conferment of permanent status Act, is a general
                          law applicable to the employees, in the absence of any special law
                          governing the particular subject. However, if any such law prevails
                          and covering the field of appointment of regularisation and
                          permanent absorption, then the general law would not apply. In
                          nutshell, the special law and rules will prevail over the general law
                          and the special rules in force are to be applied in the relevant case

                                110. In view of the discussions made above, this Court is of
                          the opinion that the writ petitioners are not entitled for any relief of
                          permanent absorption as such sought for in this writ petition.”


http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                         87


                            8. The above cited case is strictly connected with the engagement of

                  daily wage employees in Water Resources Organization / Public Works

                  Department.



                            9. In view of the above, the writ petitioner is not entitled for the

                  benefits of regularization and permanent absorption.         Further, the writ

                  petitioner even at the time of filing the present writ petition was aged about 58

                  years and now he would have aged about 63 years.            Thus, the grant of

                  regularization and permanent absorption does not arise at all.



                            10. Accordingly, the writ petition stands dismissed. No costs.



                                                                           11.07.2019
                  Index : Yes / No
                  Internet : Yes / No

                  krk




http://www.judis.nic.in

                                                      88




                  To:

                  1.The Secretary,
                    Public Works Department,
                    State of Tamil Nadu,
                    Fort St.George, Chennai-9.



                  2.The Chief Engineer,
                    Water Resource Organization,
                    Chepauk, Chennai-5.



                  3.The Chief Engineer,
                    Water Resource Organization,
                    Madurai Division, Madurai.



                  4.The Superintending Engineer,
                    Water Resource Organization,
                    Tamirabarani Basin Circle,
                    Palayamkottai, Tirunelveli-2.



                  5.The Executive Engineer,
                    P.W.D.Water Resources Organization,
                    Kothaiyar Basin Division, Nagercoil.



http://www.judis.nic.in

                          89


                                        S.M.SUBRAMANIAM,J.



                                                           krk





                               W.P.(MD) No.21195 of 2014





                                     11.07.2019




http://www.judis.nic.in


