



[Cites 
17
, Cited by 
0
]




Uttarakhand High Court


Babu Ram Kashyap vs Canara Bank (Erstwhile Syndicate Bank) on 29 April, 2024


  IN THE HIGH COURT OF UTTARAKHAND
             AT NAINITAL
              MS. JUSTICE RITU BAHRI, C.J.
                         AND
           MR. JUSTICE RAKESH THAPLIYAL, J.
                          Reserved On : 10.04.2024
                          Delivered on: 29.04.2024
   WRIT PETITION (M/B) NO. 75 OF 2023 (1)
Babu Ram Kashyap           ..................Petitioner.

Versus

Canara Bank (Erstwhile Syndicate Bank) ...Respondent

   WRIT PETITION (M/S) NO. 396 OF 2022 (2)
Canara Bank Erstwhile Syndicate Bank Regional Office
                                  ..................Petitioner.

Versus

Laxmi Kant Sharma                       ...Respondent

   WRIT PETITION (M/S) NO. 401 OF 2022 (3)
Canara Bank Erstwhile Syndicate Bank Regional Office
                                  ..................Petitioner.

Versus

Sheo Shanker Pandey                    ...Respondent
   WRIT PETITION (M/S) NO. 406 OF 2022 (4)
Canara Bank Erstwhile Syndicate Bank Regional Office
                                  ..................Petitioner.

Versus

Ravindra Kumar Chauhan                 ...Respondent
   WRIT PETITION (M/S) NO. 413 OF 2022 (5)
Canara Bank Erstwhile Syndicate Bank Regional Office
                                  ..................Petitioner.

Versus

Chandra Prakash Bisht                  ...Respondent
   WRIT PETITION (M/S) NO. 415 OF 2022 (6)
Canara Bank Erstwhile Syndicate Bank Regional Office
                                  ..................Petitioner.
 Versus

Rakesh Kumar Bhatnagar                 ...Respondent
   WRIT PETITION (M/S) NO. 418 OF 2022 (7)
Canara Bank Erstwhile Syndicate Bank Regional Office
                                  ..................Petitioner.

Versus

Ghanshyam Singh Dhami             ...Respondent
   WRIT PETITION (M/S) NO. 419 OF 2022 (8)
Canara Bank Erstwhile Syndicate Bank Regional Office
                                  ..................Petitioner.

Versus

Rajendra Singh Rawat                   ...Respondent
   WRIT PETITION (M/S) NO. 420 OF 2022 (9)
Canara Bank Erstwhile Syndicate Bank Regional Office
                                  ..................Petitioner.

Versus

Om Pal Singh                           ...Respondent
  WRIT PETITION (M/S) NO. 423 OF 2022 (10)
Canara Bank Erstwhile Syndicate Bank Regional Office
                                  ..................Petitioner.

Versus

Babu Ram Kashyap                       ...Respondent
  WRIT PETITION (M/S) NO. 424 OF 2022 (11)
Canara Bank Erstwhile Syndicate Bank Regional Office
                                  ..................Petitioner.

Versus

Sushil Kumar Grover                    ...Respondent
  WRIT PETITION (M/S) NO. 429 OF 2022 (12)
Canara Bank Erstwhile Syndicate Bank Regional Office
                                  ..................Petitioner.

Versus

Rajeshwar Sharma                       ...Respondent
  WRIT PETITION (M/S) NO. 430 OF 2022 (13)
Canara Bank Erstwhile Syndicate Bank Regional Office

                          2
                                  ..................Petitioner.

Versus

Jagat Ram                              ...Respondent
  WRIT PETITION (M/S) NO. 432 OF 2022 (14)
Canara Bank Erstwhile Syndicate Bank Regional Office
                                  ..................Petitioner.

Versus

Krishna Kant Rastogi                   ...Respondent
   WRIT PETITION (M/S) NO. 437 OF 2022 (15)
Canara Bank Erstwhile Syndicate Bank Regional Office
                                  ..................Petitioner.

Versus

Rakesh Kumar Agarwal                   ...Respondent
  WRIT PETITION (M/S) NO. 858 OF 2022 (16)
Canara Bank Erstwhile Syndicate Bank Regional Office
                                  ..................Petitioner.

Versus

Raj Kumar Bhasin                 ...Respondent
   WRIT PETITION (M/B) NO. 97 OF 2023 (17)
Sheo Shanker Pandey         ..................Petitioner.

Versus

Canara Bank (Erstwhile Syndicate bank).
                                 ...Respondent
   WRIT PETITION (M/B) NO. 98 OF 2023 (18)
Laxmi Kant Sharma           ..................Petitioner.

Versus

Canara Bank (Erstwhile Syndicate bank).
                                 ...Respondent
   WRIT PETITION (M/B) NO. 99 OF 2023 (19)
Rajeshwar Sharma            ..................Petitioner.

Versus

Canara Bank (Erstwhile Syndicate bank).
                                          ...Respondent

                          3
   WRIT PETITION (M/B) NO. 100 OF 2023 (20)
Rakesh Kumar Agarwal       ..................Petitioner.

Versus

Canara Bank (Erstwhile Syndicate bank).
                                 ...Respondent
   WRIT PETITION (M/B) NO. 101 OF 2023 (21)
Krishna Kant Rastogi        ..................Petitioner.

Versus

Canara Bank (Erstwhile Syndicate bank).
                                ...Respondent
  WRIT PETITION (M/B) NO. 102 OF 2023 (22)
Ghanshyam Singh Dhami      ..................Petitioner.

Versus

Canara Bank (Erstwhile Syndicate bank).
                                ...Respondent
  WRIT PETITION (M/B) NO. 103 OF 2023 (23)
Chander Prakash Bist       ..................Petitioner.

Versus

Canara Bank (Erstwhile Syndicate bank).
                                ...Respondent
  WRIT PETITION (M/B) NO. 104 OF 2023 (24)
Ravindra Kumar Chauhan     ..................Petitioner.

Versus

Canara Bank (Erstwhile Syndicate bank).
                                ...Respondent
  WRIT PETITION (M/B) NO. 105 OF 2023 (25)
Sushil Kumar Grover        ..................Petitioner.

Versus

Canara Bank (Erstwhile Syndicate bank).
                                ...Respondent
  WRIT PETITION (M/B) NO. 107 OF 2023 (26)
Raj Kumar Bhasin           ..................Petitioner.

Versus


                          4
 Canara Bank (Erstwhile Syndicate bank).
                                                   ...Respondent
                    &
  WRIT PETITION (M/B) NO. 108 OF 2023 (27)
Om Pal Singh               ..................Petitioner.

Versus

Canara Bank (Erstwhile Syndicate bank).
                                                   ...Respondent
Counsel for the petitioners   :   Mr. Vipul Gupta, learned Senior
                                  Counsel assisted by Mr. A.M. Saklani,
                                  learned counsel for the petitioner in
                                  WPMB No. 75 of 2023.
                                  Mr. Siddharth Sah, learned counsel
                                  for the petitioner in WPMS Nos. 396,
                                  401, 406, 413, 415, 418, 419, 420,
                                  423, 424, 429, 430, 432, 437, 858 of
                                  2022 and WPMB Nos. 97, 98, 99, 100,
                                  101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 107, 108 of
                                  2023.
Counsel for the respondents   :   Mr. Ashish Joshi, learned counsel for
                                  the respondent in WPMB No. 75, 97,
                                  98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105,
                                  107, 108 of 2023.
                                  Mr. Shashank Upadhyay, learned
                                  counsel for the respondents in WPMS
                                  Nos. 396, 401, 406, 413, 415, 418,
                                  420, 423, 424, 429, 430, 432, 437,
                                  and 858 of 2022.




Upon hearing the learned Counsel, the Court
made the following

JUDGMENT :
 (per Ms. Ritu Bahri, C.J.)


              Since a common issue is involved in this

bunch of writ petitions, it is being disposed of by a

common judgment.



2.            For the sake of brevity, the facts of 
WPMB

No. 75 of 2023 Babu Ram Kashyap Vs. Canara Bank

(Erstwhile Syndicate Bank
) are being taken-up for

consideration.






                                  5


 3.        The petitioner has challenged the order dated

29.11.2021 passed by the Appellate Authority / Deputy

Chief Labour Commissioner (Central), Dehradun under


Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972
 (hereinafter referred to

as the PG Act).



4.        The petitioner preferred a claim for grant of

Service Gratuity after seeking VRS on 10.11.2014 in

terms of the Bank after completing active service of 36

years 3 months and 12 days, but his claim for gratuity

was not decided and he approached the Controlling

Authority for issuing appropriate direction to the Bank

for deciding the claim. The Bank decided the claim vide

order dated 06.05.2019 (Annexure PA-1) and an

amount of Rs. 11,87,100.00 (Rs. Eleven Lacs Eighty

Seven Thousand One Hundred Only) was granted as

the Service Gratuity. It was stated that it has been

calculated as per Syndicate Bank Officers Service

Regulations, 1979 (for short "SBOSR"). The calculation

of the gratuity has been done by observing in the order

dated 06.05.2019 as under:-



           "For purpose of calculating Gratuity as per
     Syndicate Bank Officers Service Regulation, the
     eligible component of pay are: Basic Pay +
     Stagnation Pay + Basic components of EPP + PQP
     + other allowances (ranking for PF only) shall be
     considered.



                           6


             Further we wish to inform you that "The
       Regulation 46(2) of Syndicate Bank (Officers)
       Service Regulation, 1979, read as the amount of
       gratuity payable to Officer shall be one month
       "pay" for every completed year of service subject
       to maximum of 15 months of pay. Provided that
       where an officer has completed more than 30
       years of service, he shall be eligible by way of
       gratuity for additional amount @ on half of months
       pay for each completed year of service beyond 30
       years. Therefore, it is relevant to peruse the
       definition of "Pay" and "salary" which defines
       "Pay" as basic pay including stagnation increment
       and "Salary" means the aggregate of the pay and
       DA."



5.          The Bank has, vide impugned order dated

06.05.2019, declined the claim of 45 days additional

amount of pension for each completed year of service

after completion of 30 years' service and has allowed

only 15 days additional amount for each completed

year of service after completion of 30 years' service by

the    officer.      Against   the     impugned      order    dated

06.05.2019 (Annexure P-1), the petitioner approached

the    Controlling    Authority       after   registration.    The

registered case number is Case No. D-36(32)/2019-

ALC.





6.          As per the order, the gratuity was awarded to

the tune of Rs. 15,22,042/-. The claim of the petitioner

for additional sum of 45 days for each completed year

after completion of service of 30 years was not allowed



                                  7

 and a final order was passed by the Controlling

Authority, which is as under:-



          "Final Order"

          In view of the above mentioned legal points,
     I am of considered opinion that the appellant Sh.
     Babu Ram Kashyap is entitled to receive total
     gratuity of 15,22,042/- (Rupees Fifteen Lakh
     Twenty Two Thousand & Forty Two Only) as the
     higher amount of gratuity as per the service
     Regulations of the bank. As the applicant has
     already received Rs. 11,87,100/-, he need to be
     paid further amount of gratuity equivalent to Rs.
     3,34,942/- (Rupees Three Lakh Thirty Four
     Thousand Thirty & Nine Hundred & Forty Two
     Only), by the Respondent (The General Manager,
     Syndicate Bank, Head Office, Manipal) within 30
     days from receipt of this order along with simple
     interest @ 7% p.a. from 12.10.2014."



7.        With respect to length of service, the gratuity

was calculated for a period of three years beyond 30

years i.e. till 33 years.   The petitioner, in the present

case, has put in service of 36 years, three months and

twelve days. The petitioner is also aggrieved that the

benefit of six of years of service beyond thirty years

has been wrongly denied.



8.        The petitioner was communicated the claim

order vide order dated 28th February, 2020 (Annexure

PA-2).   Against   the   order   dated   28.02.2020,   the

petitioner filed an Appeal under Section 7(7) of PG Act

(Annexure P-3). The Bank also filed an Appeal against

the order dated 28.02.2020 passed by the Controlling


                             8

 Authority.     Both the Appeals were decided by the

Appellate     Authority   by   a   common   order   dated

29.11.2021 (Annexure P-4).



9.           In the impugned order, while interpreting

Clause-46 of SBOSR, the Appellate Authority held as

under:-



      "Now after noting the above findings, I conclude
      that the respondent is entitled to be paid
      additional amount of gratuity over and above what
      has already been paid to him but not as per
      calculation arrived at by the CA. The CA should
      include the component of DA only with Basic Pay
      and calculate the amount of payable gratuity
      accordingly. The CA should further calculate
      interest @ 5% only upon the difference of amount
      of gratuity paid and payable."



10.          The Appellate Authority has not given the

benefit of calculation of gratuity beyond thirty years of

service i.e. 36 years three months and twelve days,

which was given by the Controlling Authority as per

Regulation 46 of Syndicate Bank (Officers') Service

Regulations, 1979. Hence, this writ petition has been

filed now. The challenge has been made on two

grounds:-



      (I)    The CA reduced the interest from 7% p.a. to

      5% p.a. which is against the Circular of the

      Reserve Bank of India dated 6th March, 2020

      (Annexure No. 5 to the writ petition), which


                               9

       prescribes payment of interest at the rate of 10%

      till the date of making payment.



      (II) Clause 46 of SBOSR has been misread and

      misinterpreted   by   only   including   Dearness

      Allowance as part of pay and not including

      Emoluments as part of pay.



INTEREST:-



11.        Counsel for the petitioner has referred to the

judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in 
Y.K.

Sigla vs. Punjab National Bank & Ors. (Civil

Appeal No.
 9087 of 2012, decided on 14.12.2012)

and D.D. Tiwari vs. Uttar Haryana Bizli Vitran

Nigam Ltd. (Civil Appeal No. 7113 of 2014),

wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that

Controlling Authorities (CA) have no discretion to award

interest on delayed payment other than the rate of

interest as is provided under the statute in terms of

Sub Section (3A) of 
Section 7
 of Payment of Gratuity

Act, 1972.




12.        In another judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme

Court in Assistant Commissioner, Commercial Tax

Department, Works Contract & Leasing, Kota vs.

Shukla & Brothers (2010) 4 SCC 785, it has been

held that the rate of interest cannot be reduced by the


                            10

 Controlling Authority once it was granted as per the

prevalent rules of banking.




DEFINITION OF WORD 'PAY':-



13.       The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of

The Regional Provident Fund Commissioner (II)

W.B. vs. Vivekanand Vidhya Mandir & Ors. (Civil

Appeal No. 6221 of 2011, decided on 28.02.2019)

held that the basic principle is where the wage is

universally,   necessarily   and   ordinarily   paid   to   all

employees across the board, such emoluments are

basic wages. It is not denied by the respondent-Bank

that Special Allowance is being paid to all the officers

working in the Bank at the rate based on their scale of

pay.   Therefore, exclusion of Special Allowance from

the component of Basic Pay is not permissible for the

purpose of calculating gratuity.     Therefore, the same

shall be taken as part of basic pay for calculating the

gratuity payable to the officers of the respondent-Bank

but no reason has been assigned by the learned AA

with regard to exclusion of Special Allowance. In the

said judgment with regard to addition of Dearness

Allowance, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has observed as

under:-





                              11


 "9. Basic wage, under the Act, has been defined
as all emoluments paid in cash to an employee in
accordance with the terms of his contract of
employment. But it carves out certain exceptions
which would not fall within the definition of basic
wage and which includes dearness allowance apart
from other allowances mentioned therein. But this
exclusion of dearness allowance finds inclusion in

Section 6
. The test adopted to determine if any
payment was to be excluded from basic wage is
that the payment under the scheme must have a
direct access and linkage to the payment of such
special allowance as not being common to all. The
crucial test is one of universality. The employer,
under the Act, has a statutory obligation to deduct
the specified percentage of the contribution from
the employee's salary and make matching
contribution. The entire amount is then required to
be deposited in the fund within 15 days from the
date of such collection. The aforesaid provisions
fell for detailed consideration by this Court
in Bridge & Roof (supra) when it was observed as
follows:-

      "7. The main question therefore that falls for
      decision is as to which of these two rival
      contentions is in consonance with
 s. 2(b)
.
      There is no doubt that "basic wages" as
      defined therein means all emoluments which
      are earned by an employee while on duty or
      on leave with wages in accordance with the
      terms of the contract of employment and
      which are paid or payable in cash. If there
      were no exceptions to this definition, there
      would have been no difficulty in holding that
      production bonus whatever be its nature
      would be included within these terms. The
      difficulty, however, arises because the
      definition also provides that certain things
      will not be included in the term "basic
      wages", and these are contained in three
      clauses. The first clause mentions the cash
      value of any food concession while the third
      clause mentions that presents made by the
      employer. The fact that the exceptions
      contain even presents made by the employer
      shows that though the definition mentions all
      emoluments which are earned in accordance


                      12

 with the terms of the contract of
employment, care was taken to exclude
presents which would ordinarily not be
earned in accordance with the terms of the
contract of employment. Similarly, though
the definition includes "all emoluments"

which are paid or payable in cash, the
exception excludes the cash value of any
food concession, which in any case was not
payable in cash. The exceptions therefore do
not seem to follow any logical pattern which
would be in consonance with the main
definition.

8. Then we come to clause (ii). It excludes
dearness allowance, house rent allowance,
overtime allowance, bonus, commission or
any other similar allowance payable to the
employee in respect of his employment or of
work done in such employment. This
exception suggests that even though the
main part of the definition includes all
emoluments which are earned in accordance
with the terms of the contract of
employment, certain payments which are in
fact the price of labour and earned in
accordance with the terms of the contract of
employment are excluded from the main part
of the definition of "basic wages". It is
undeniable that the exceptions contained in
clause (ii) refer to payments which are
earned by an employee in accordance with
the terms of his contract of employment. It
was admitted by counsel on both sides before
us that it was difficult to find any one basis
for the exceptions contained in the three
clauses. It is clear however from clause (ii)
that from the definition of the word "basic
wages" certain earnings were excluded,
though they must be earned by employees in
accordance with the terms of the contract of
employment. Having excluded "dearness
allowance" from the definition of "basic
wages", s. 6 then provides for inclusion of
dearness     allowance     for   purposes    of
contribution. But that is clearly the result of
the specific provision in
 s. 6
 which lays down
that contribution shall be 6-1/4 per centum


                 13

 of the basic wages, dearness allowance and
retaining allowance (if any). We must
therefore try to discover some basis for the
exclusion in clause (ii) as also the inclusion of
dearness allowance and retaining allowance
(for any) in
 s. 6
. It seems that the basis of
inclusion in
 s. 6
 and exclusion in clause (ii) is
that whatever is payable in all concerns and
is earned by all permanent employees is
included for the purpose, of contribution
under
 s. 6
, but whatever is not payable by all
concerns or may not be earned by all
employees of a concern is excluded for the
purpose of contribution. Dearness allowance
(for examples is payable in all concerns
either as an addition to basic wages or as a
part of consolidated wages where a concern
does not have separate dearness allowance
and     basic   wages.    Similarly,    retaining
allowance is payable to all permanent
employees in all seasonal factories like sugar
factories and is therefore included in
 s. 6
; but
house rent allowance is not paid in many
concerns and sometimes in the same concern
it is paid to some employees but not to
others, for the theory is that house rent is
included in the payment of basic wages plus
dearness allowance or consolidated wages.
Therefore, house rent allowance which may
not be payable to all employees of a concern
and which is certainly not paid by all concern
is taken out of the definition of "basic
wages", even though the basis of payment of
house rent allowance where it is paid is the
contract of employment. Similarly, overtime
allowance though it is generally in force in all
concerns is not earned by all employees of a
concern. It is also earned in accordance with
the terms of the contract of employment; but
because it may not be earned by all
employees of a concern it is excluded from
"basic wages". Similarly, commission or any
other similar allowance is excluded from the
definition of "basic wages" for commission
and other allowances are not necessarily to
be found in all concerns; nor are they
necessarily earned by all employees of the


                 14

           same concern, though where they exist they
          are earned in accordance with the terms of
          the contract of employment. It seems
          therefore that the basis for the exclusion in
          clause (ii) of the exceptions in
 s. 2(b)
 is that
          all that is not earned in all concerns or by all
          employees of concern is excluded from basic
          wages. To this the exclusion of dearness
          allowance in clause (ii) is an exception. But
          that exception has been corrected by
          including dearness allowance in
 s. 6
 for the
          purpose of contribution. Dearness allowance
          which is an exception in the definition of
          "basic wages", is included for the propose of
          contribution by
 s. 6
 and the real exceptions
          therefore in clause (ii) are the other
          exceptions beside dearness allowance, which
          has been included through
 S. 6
."



14.       Original Pension Regulation of 1995 is still in

force and no amendment has yet been made in such

Regulation regarding exclusion of Special Allowance.

The definition of 'Pay' as defined in Reg. 3(k) is

inclusive definition, which means that the basic pay not

only includes stagnation increment, but also other

component of basic pay as held by the Hon'ble Apex

Court in Vivekanand Vidyamandir case (supra) and

the Madhya Pradesh High Court in 
Madhyanchal

Gramin Bank and others vs. All India Gramin Bank

Pensioners Organisation Unit (WA Nos
. 1318 of

2018, 1316 of 2018 & 1317 of 2018, decided on

26.02.2019).






                           15


 15.         
In a recent judgment rendered by the High

Court of Kerala at Ernakulam in 
Muralee Mohanan

K.T. and others vs. Corporation Bank and others


(WP (C) No. 32386 of 2015 (W), decided on

15.10.2019), the Kerala High Court condemned the

exclusion    of    special   allowance     payable   to     bank

employees / officers. For ready reference, the relevant

Paragraphs     8   and   9   of     
the   said   judgment
    are

reproduced herein below:-




 
"8. However, in 
Bank of Baroda v. G.Palani
      and others
, the Apex Court drew a distinction
      where the aggrieved employees are officers who
      retired from the Bank in question. It was held that
      the provisions of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947

      are not applicable to such officers. It was held that
      the Pension Regulations framed under 
Section 19

      of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and
      Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 are statutory
      in character. In the circumstances, in view of the
      definition of average emoluments at 
Regulation
      2(d)
, Pay at 
Regulation 2(s)
 and the provision for
      calculating pension at Regulation 35, it was held
      that employees are to be paid pension as provided
      in the Regulations and no reduction from the same
      is possible, relying on the provisions of a Joint
      Note, which has no statutory force, unless the
      Regulations are appropriately amended. It was
      held in paragraph 28 of the judgment as follows:-


            "28. Thus joint note/agreement could not
            have been in derogation of the existing
            statutory Regulations and regulation 2(s)(c)
            could not have been given retrospective
            effect. It is also apparent from the decisions
            of this Court in P.Sadagopan vs.Food
            Corporation of India [(1997) 4 SCC 301],
            that executive instructions cannot be issued
            in derogation of the statutory Regulations.
            The settled position of law is that no

                               16

            Government Order, Notification or Circular
           can be a substitute of the statutory rules
           framed with the authority of law. 
In
           
Dr.Rajinder Singh v. State of Punjab & Ors

           (2001) 5 SCC 482, this Court had reiterated
           that the settled position of law is that no
           government order, notification or circular can
           be a substitute of the statutory rules framed
           with the authority of law. In K.Kuppuswamy
           & Anr.v. State of Tamil Nadu (1998) 8 SCC
           469, this Court has observed that statutory
           rules cannot be overriden by executive
           orders or executive practice. Merely because
           the Government had taken a decision to
           amend the rules, does not mean that the rule
           stood obliterated. Till the rule is amended,
           the rule applies."


      The amendment to 
Regulation 2(s)
 of the Pension
      Regulations was struck down as arbitrary and
      repugnant to 
Regulation 2(d)
, 35 and 38(1) and
      (2).

      9.    In the above view of the matter, I am of the
      opinion that the prayers sought for in the writ
      petition are liable to be allowed. The petitioners
      are entitled to pension in terms of the Pension
      Regulations especially 
Regulation 2(d)
 and 35
      thereof. The respondents are directed to revise
      the basic pension of the petitioners in accordance
      with the provisions of the Corporation Bank
      (Employees) Pension Regulation, 1995 by taking
      into account the Special Allowances introduced in
      Exhibit P6 as part of pay for the purpose of Basic
      Pension. There will be a direction to the 2nd
      respondent to recalculate the commutation
      pension of the petitioners on the basis of the
      revised basic pension by including the special
      allowance introduced vide Exhibit P6 and to refund
      the pension arrears recovered from the petitioners
      as per Exhibits P5. P5(a),P5(b) and P5(c). The
      necessary shall be done within a period of three
      months from the date of receipt of a copy of this
      judgment."





16.          So far as inclusion of DA is concerned in the

definition    of   'Pay',   both    the   CA   as   well   as   AA

                                   17

 categorically held in view of binding precedents that DA

shall be part of basic pay. There appears no illegality

in such finding.



How the gratuity is to be calculated after serving

for a period beyond thirty years:-





17.        Recently, the High Court of Rajasthan in

Rajasthan Marudhara Gramin Bank, Jodhpur vs.

The Appellate Authority (S.B. Civil Writ Petition

No. 7359 of 2019, decided on 16.10.2020) has

considered this aspect of the matter and in the light of

the facts narrated in Paragraph 4 has made its

observation in Paragraph 22.      Relevant Paragraphs 4

and 22 read as under:-



      "4. The brief facts of the case as noticed by this
      Court are that all these writ petitions relate to the
      dispute of computation of gratuity of the retired
      Bank Officers. The petitioner bank is a Regional
      Rural Bank which has been constituted by
      amalgamation of Marudhara Gramin Bank and
      Mewar Anchalik Gramin Bank on 01.04.2014. The
      retired Bank Officers-private respondents filed
      their respective applications before the Controlling
      Authority under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act,
      1972
 claiming the differential amount of gratuity
      with interest with effect from 01.12.2017 based
      on the basic + dearness allowance + PQP + FPP
      components of the last pay drawn for the
      calculation of amount of gratuity payable to such
      officers. The petitioner-Bank vehemently objected
      their applications but the same were allowed and
      the petitioner-Bank was directed to pay the
      additional amount of gratuity along with simple
      interest at the rate of 10% with effect from

                            18

 01.12.2017 till the date of payment made by the
petitioner-Bank. The petitioner being aggrieved by
the order of the Controlling Authority filed appeals
under 
Section 7
 Sub-
Section 7
 of the Payment of
Gratuity Act 1972, before the Appellate Authority
under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972
 and
Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner (Central),
Ajmer. The petitioner being under a legal
obligation deposited the difference of the amount
to the Government before filing the appeals. The
Appellate Authority partly allowed the appeals with
a direction to pay lesser amount along with
simple (31 of 83) [CW-7359/2019] interest at the
rate of 10% per month with effect from
01.12.2017 only on the ground of the ratio of the
monthly addition of gratuity after completion of 30
years while upholding the broader issue laid down
by the Controlling Authority. The bank officers
have also made cross-objections against the
Appellate Authority's order in certain writ petitions
whereby the calculations as per Clause 72(3) of
the regulation have been made and reduced by
the Appellate Authority and seeking of counting 30
days + 15 days i.e. one and a half months' salary
for the basic computation.



22. In view of the above, the writ petitions are
allowed. The impugned orders passed by the
Appellate Authority are quashed and set aside and
the orders passed by the Controlling Authority in
the case of the contesting respondents are
restored. Accordingly, the petitioner Bank is found
not liable to pay any further amount towards
gratuity to the contesting respondents as they
admittedly received the amount of Rs.10,00,000/-
from the petitioner Bank immediately upon their
superannuation." This Court is of the opinion that
the     judgment       in 
Madhyanchal       Gramin
Bank
 (supra) rendered by the Hon'ble Madhya
Pradesh High Court and upheld by the Hon'ble
Apex Court is the correct view and also binding
upon this Court on count of the same having been
upheld by the Hon'ble Apex Court. Moreover, the
Regulations of 2010 clearly define in Clause
2(1)(i) that emoluments means aggregate of
salary and allowances and in Clause 2(1)(m) pay
means basic pay drawn per month by the officer


                      19

 or employee in a pay scale including stagnation
increments and any part of the emoluments which
may specifically be classified as pay under these
Regulations. As per the Clause 72(1) of the
Regulations, for the purpose of gratuity, an officer
or employee shall be eligible either as per the
provision of 
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972
 or as
per the Sub-Regulation (2), whichever is higher
and thus, for the beneficial legislation of a welfare
law, the benevolent connotation ought to have
been accepted by this Court. There is no reason
why this Court should take a different view than
the one taken by the Hon'ble Madhya Pradesh
High Court and affirmed by the Hon'ble Apex
Court. The cross-objections made by the Officers
do not warrant any interference by this Court
because on a bare reading (82 of 83) [CW-
7359/2019] of Clause 72(3) of the Regulations, it
is clear that the Statute required the petitioner to
pay half month's pay for each completed year of
service beyond 30 years. Clause 72(3) of the
Regulations reads as follows:-




     "(3) The amount of gratuity payable to an
     officer or employee shall be one months pay
     for every completed year of service or part
     thereof in excess of six months subject to a
     maximum of 15 month's pay:



          Provided that where an officer or
     employee has completed more than 30 years
     of service, he shall be eligible by way of
     gratuity for an additional amount at the rate
     of one half of a month's pay for each
     completed year of service beyond 30 years:



          Provided that in respect of an officer the
     gratuity is payable based on the last pay
     drawn:



          Provided also that in respect of an
     employee pay for the purposes of calculation
     of the gratuity shall be the average of the
     basic pay (100%), dearness allowance and
     special allowance and officiating allowance
     payable during the 12 months preceding
     death, disability, retirement, resignation or
     termination of service, as the case may be."

                      20


             Regulation 72(3) has an optimum gratuity
      prescribed upto maximum of 15 months' pay and
      the concession given is only for the officers who
      have completed more than 30 years of service by
      making them entitled for an additional amount of
      one half of month's pay for each completed year
      of service beyond 30 years, which is an exception
      to the maximum of 15 months' pay gratuity rule
      and thus, the exception has to be read strictly. It
      is thus clear that the Appellate Authority has
      rightly arrived at a conclusion that the Officers
      who have completed more than 30 years of
      service shall be eligible by way of gratuity for
      the (83 of 83) [CW-7359/2019] additional amount
      at the rate of one half month's pay for each
      completed service beyond 30 years. Thus, once
      the statute is clear, there is no question of
      expanding the meaning. It is one thing to choose
      one of the beneficial conditions amongst two and
      it is another thing to expand the ambit of benefits
      which are strictly prescribed. Accordingly, the
      cross objections are dismissed. In light of the
      aforementioned observations, the legal issues,
      facts and grounds raised by the petitioners do not
      call for interference by this Court. Accordingly, all
      these writ petitions are dismissed and the orders
      of the Appellate Authority are upheld.          The
      consequential benefits shall be released to the
      respondent officers within a period of three
      months starting from 1st December, 2020. All
      pending applications stand dismissed accordingly.
      All the interim orders stand vacated."



18.        The judgment of the Rajasthan High Court

has been upheld by the Hon'ble Supreme Court.



19.        In the facts of the present case, as per

proviso   to   Regulation   46(2)   of   the   SBOSR,   the

calculation of the gratuity is done. Regulation 46(2) of

the SBOSR reads as under:-





                            21


           "Gratuity:



          46.(2) The amount of gratuity payable to an
          officer shall be one month's pay for every
          completed year of service, subject to a
          maximum of 15 months' pay.



         Provided that where an officer has completed
         more than 30 years of service, he shall be
         eligible by way of gratuity for an additional
         amount at the rate of one half of a month's
         pay for each completed year of service
         beyond 30 years.



         Provided further that pay for the purpose of
         Gratuity for an officer who ceased to be in
         service during the period 1-7-1993 to 31-10-
         1994 shall be with regard to scale of pay as
         specified in sub-regulation (1) of regulation 4.

         Provided also that pay for the purpose of
         Gratuity of an Officer who ceased to be in
         service during the period 1-4-1998 to 31-10-
         1999 shall be with regard to scale of pay as
         specified in sub-regulation (2) of Regulation

         4.

         Note:



         If the fraction of service beyond completed
         years of service is 6 months or more, gratuity
         will be paid pro-rata for the period."



21.       The judgment of Rajasthan High Court is

applicable to the facts of the present case, which made

it clear that for the purpose of calculation of gratuity

beyond   thirty   years,   which   is   an   exception,   the

additional amount at the rate of one half month's pay

for each completed year of service beyond 30 years has

to be calculated.   The Rajasthan High Court has held

that the officers, who have completed more than thirty

                           22

 years of service, shall be eligible by way of gratuity for

the additional amount @ one half month's pay for each

completed service beyond thirty years. Thus, once the

statute is very clear, there is no question of expanding

the meaning.



22.       In the present case as well, as per the

proviso to Regulation 46(2) of the SBOSR, if an officer

has completed more than thirty years he is eligible by

way of gratuity for an additional amount at the rate of

one half month's salary for each completed year of

service beyond thirty years. Hence, for the purpose of

calculation of gratuity, the salary of 45 days has to be

taken into account for each completed year beyond

thirty years.



23.       
In the writ petitions filed by the Canara Bank,

counsel for the Bank has referred to the judgment of

the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of 
Beed

District Central Cooperative Bank Ltd. vs. State of

Maharashtra and others
 (2006) 8 SCC 514 has

been referred to on the preposition that when an

Scheme of employer has been offered, the workman

can opt for the best terms of Statute, and the nature of

gratuity scheme and agreement of the parties cannot


                           23

 be changed subsequently to take better benefits under

the 
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972
.




24.       He has further referred to another judgment

of the Calcutta High Court in 
Paschim Banga Gramin

Bank and others vs. Chinmay Majumdar & others


(F.M.A.   657    of   2020,      decided       on   04.02.2021),

wherein the Calcutta High Court has held that once the

employee has accepted the terms and conditions of the

Regulations for the purpose of definition of the word

'pay'   and   calculation   of     gratuity,    then   they   are

restrained from seeking modification of definition of the

word 'pay' and mode of calculation of gratuity.




25.       He further states that in this judgment, the

respondents were claiming the benefit of Dearness Pay

to be treated as part of pay. However, the High Court

allowed the appeal filed by the Bank and restricted the

meaning of the words as per the Regulations of the

Bank. The Regulation made a clear distinction between

an officer and an employee and in the matter of

calculation of gratuity.    Regarding the employees, the

'basic pay' included only allowances and not 'dearness

allowance' and the appeal of the Bank was allowed.



                              24


 26.       In the present case, as per the impugned

order dated 17th December, 2021 (Annexure-4), the

Appellate Authority had partly allowed the Appeal of

Shri Babu Ram Kashyap by including Basic Pay and

DA for the purpose of calculation of gratuity and

awarded 5% interest.



27.       In the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme

Court    in    the    Regional     Provident     Fund

Commissioner (II) W.B. (supra), while dealing with

the employees of the Bank, it has been held that the

definition of 'pay' was an inclusive definition, which

means that the Basic Pay not only includes stagnation

increment but also other component of the Basic Pay,

i.e. the Special Allowance.      
Similarly, the Madhya

Pradesh High Court in 
Madhyanchal Gramin Bank

and others
 (supra) and the Kerala High Court in


Muralee Mohanan K.T. and others
 (supra) have held

that exclusion of Special Allowances payable to the

bank employees / officers for calculating gratuity was

not correct, and the petitioners were held entitled to

pension in terms of the Pension Regulations by taking

into account the Special Allowances.




                          25


 28.       In the present case, as per the Regulations of

the   Bank,   the     definition     of    'emoluments'           is     in


Regulation 3(e)
, which reads as under:-



      "e) "Emoluments" means the aggregate of salary
      and allowances if any."



29.       The definitions of words 'pay' and 'salary' are

given in 
Regulation 3(k)
 and 
Regulation 3(l)
 of the

Regulations of the Bank respectively, which read as

under:-





      "k) "Pay' means basic pay including stagnation
      increment.



      l) "Salary" means the aggregate of the pay and
      dearness allowance."



30.       Applying      the    ratio      of   the    above            said

judgments, the definition of 'pay' is inclusive of special

allowances,   emoluments,           dearness      allowance            and

stagnation    increments.          Hence,      the        petitioners

(employees)     are    entitled     to    include     the    Special

Allowances as part of Pay for the purpose of calculation

of gratuity by including Dearness Allowance as well.



31.       The    second       ground      taken      by     the        writ

petitioner is that the payment of interest could not be

reduced from 10% to 5%. Even on this aspect, the



                               26

 Hon'ble Supreme Court in 
Y.K. Sigla vs. Punjab

National Bank & Ors. (Civil Appeal No.
 9087 of

2012, decided on 14.12.2012) and D.D. Tiwari vs.

Uttar    Haryana    Bizli   Vitran   Nigam        Ltd.   (Civil

Appeal    No.    7113       of    2014)     and    Assistant

Commissioner,       Commercial        Tax     Department,

Works Contract & Leasing, Kota vs. Shukla &

Brothers (2010) 4 SCC 785, has consistently held

that the rate of interest cannot be reduced once it was

granted by the prevalent rules of banking. Hence, in

the present case, the petitioners (employees) are

entitled for interest at the rate of 7%.


32.       The judgment, referred to by the counsel for

the Canara Bank, which is 
Beed District Central

Cooperative Bank Ltd. vs. State of Maharashtra

and others
 (2006) 8 SCC 514, will not be applicable

to the facts of the present case as 
in that case
 the

Supreme Court was not examining the definitions of

special allowances, emoluments, pay and salary of the

Bank employees. It was examining the option exercised

by an employee of the Bank.          The Hon'ble Supreme

Court was examining the provisions of the Banking

Regulations, which had been opted by the employee at



                             27

 the time of joining the Cooperative Bank. It was held

therein that the employees, thereafter, could not claim

the benefit of calculation of gratuity under the 
Payment

of Gratuity Act, 1972
.






33.       The Canara Bank, in the present case, is

bound   by   their   Regulations   for   the   purpose   of

calculation of gratuity and that is not being disputed by

the Bank employees.





34.       The judgment of the Calcutta High Court in


Paschim Banga Gramin Bank and others vs.

Chinmay Majumdar & others
 (F.M.A. 657 of 2020,

decided on 04.02.2021) cannot be made applicable in

the facts of the present case as the Calcutta High Court


in that case
 was dealing with the definition of 'pay' as

per the Regulations with respect to officers and

employees in the matter of calculation of gratuity and it

was held that once the employee had accepted the

entitlement under the Regulations
, 
in that case
, they

could not claim the benefit of definition of 'pay' which

was applicable to officers.
 
Even this judgment is not

applicable as in this judgment, the Calcutta High Court

was not examining the definition of 'pay' for the

purpose of calculation of gratuity and this aspect has


                           28

 been considered in detail in the judgment of the

Hon'ble Supreme Court in The Regional Provident

Fund Commissioner (II) W.B. vs. Vivekanand

Vidhya Mandir & Ors. (Civil Appeal No. 6221 of

2011, decided on 28.02.2019), in the judgment of the

Madhya Pradesh High Court in 
Madhyanchal Gramin

Bank and others vs. All India Gramin Bank

Pensioners Organisation Unit (WA Nos
.
 
1318 of

2018, 1316 of 2018 & 1317 of 2018, decided on

26.02.2019), the SLP against which was dismissed by

the Supreme Court, and in the judgment of the Kerala

High Court in 
Muralee Mohanan K.T. and others vs.

Corporation Bank and others
 (WP (C) No. 32386

of 2015 (W), decided on 15.10.2019).


35.        All the writ petitions, filed by the employees,

are being allowed, and a direction is given to the Bank

to recalculate their gratuity after calculating the pay,

including Dearness Allowance and emoluments, along

with 7% interest.      All the writ petitions filed by the

Canara Bank are dismissed.





                                      ______________
                                       RITU BAHRI, C.J.



                                  __________________
                                  RAKESH THAPLIYAL, J.

Dt: 29th April, 2024
Rathour


                             29



