



[Cites 
0
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Administrative Tribunal - Cuttack


V P Mohod vs Archoelogical Survey Of India on 8 July, 2022


                             1                 O.A.No. 260/00091of 2017




             CENTRAL ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
                 CUTTACK BENCH, CUTTACK

                  O.A.No. 260/00091 of 2017



Reserved on 07.07.2022                   Pronounced on 08.07.2022

CORAM:

     THE HON'BLE MR. DEVENDRA CHAUDHRY, MEMBER (A)
      THE HON'BLE MR. SWARUP KUMAR MISHRA, MEMBER (J)


                V.P. Mohod, aged about 45 years, S/o. Sri Pralad Rao
                Mohod, presently working as Sr. Horticulture,
                Assistant O/o the Deputy Superintending
                Horticulture Survey of India, Horticulture
                Archaeological Divisional, No-IV, Bhubaneswar-7.
                                                       ......Applicant
                         VERSUS

                1. Union of India represented through its Secretary,
                Ministry of Culture, Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi.

                2. The Director General, Govt. of India,
                Archaeological Survey of India, Janpath, New Delhi-
                110011.

                3. The Chief Horticulturist, Archaeological Survey of
                India, Janpath, New Delhi-110011.

                4.    The   Dy.    Superintending   Horticulture,
                Archaeological Survey of India, Horticulture
                Divisional No-4, Purattava Nivas, Tosali Plaza
                Apartment, Satyanagar, Bhubaneswar-751007.

                5. Sri P.K Chaudhary, Asst. Superintending
                Horticulturist, O/o the Dy. Superintending
                Horticulture, Archaeological Survey of India,
                Horticulture Divisional No-4, Purattava Nivas,
                                   2                 O.A.No. 260/00091of 2017




                      TosaliPlaza Apartment, Satyanagar, Bhubaneswar-
                      751007.

                      6. Sri Prasenjit Ghosh, Asst. Superintending
                      Horticulturist, O/o the Dy. Superintending
                      Horticulture, Archaeological Survey of India,
                      Horticulture Division No-II, Safdurjung Tomb, New
                      Delhi-110003.
                                                          ......Respondents

           For the Applicant     : Mr. D.K.Mohanty, Counsel

           For the Respondents: Mr. S.B.Mohanty, Counsel


                                 ORDER


Swarup Kumar Mishra, Member (J):


      The applicant, an SC candidate, was initially appointed to the

post of Horticulture Asst. Gr-I on 14.12.1995 under direct recruitment

quota. He was promoted to the post of Sr. Horticulture Assistant w.e.f.

10.10.2005 by way of seniority-cum-fitness on the recommendation of

DPC. As per the Gradation List of Sr. Horticulture Assistant, issued on

11.11.2009, he was placed at Sl. No. 8. Ld. Counsel for the applicant

claiming that basing upon the DoP&T O.M. dated 02.07.1997

(Annexure-A/4),promotion to the post of Assistant Superintending

Horticulturist (in short ASH) was effected earlier w.e.f. 1997 by

applying     roster    based   reservation,   the   applicant    submitted

representation on 24.12.2015 for consideration of his case for

                                   3                  O.A.No. 260/00091of 2017





promotion to ASH against SC Roaster Point stating that as per the

roster point the next vacancy to the said post will go in favour of SC

category. Respondents rejected the claim of the applicant being not

authentic, however, given opportunity to prove its authenticity by

document, if any. It appears that the applicant resubmitted his

representation and, subsequently, approached this Tribunal in O.A. No.

726/2016, which was disposed of by this Tribunal with direction to

the respondents to consider the representation. Consequently,

respondents considered the representation and, vide impugned order

dated 23.01.2017 (Annexure-A/10) decided that the applicant is not

due for promotion against the quota reserved for SC category. Hence,

the applicant has filed this O.A. with the following reliefs:



      (i)       To quash the order dt. 23.01.2017 under Annexure-

                A/10.

      (ii)      To direct the respondents to promote the applicant in
                the post of Asst. Superintending Horticulturist as per
                roster point reservation of SC category at Sr No.15
                retrospectively in view of OM dt. 02.07.1997 under
                Annexure A/4.

      (iii)     To direct the respondents to pay the applicant all his
                service and financial benefits retrospectively.

      (iv)      To pas any other appropriate order......"



2.    Respondents filed their counter inter alia stating that there are

only three sanctioned post of ASH in Archaeological Survey of India,

                                  4                  O.A.No. 260/00091of 2017





which are filled up 100% by promotion. The reservation roster is

prescribed for the post in a cadre where the sanctioned strength is two

or more but less than 14, which shall be applicable in the present case.



As per the roster, in respect of post filled up by promotion the point

No. 7 falls against SC category and point No. 14 for the ST category and

the reservation shall be provided by rotation on the basis of 14 point

roster. Since, the post reserved for SC category was already consumed

on the appointment of Sri H.P.Verma against the reserved quota. The

vacancy which would arise up to the 14th point shall be filled up under

the unreserved quota and one Sri Naresh Chand, although belongs to

SC category, he being senior to the applicant was promoted as ASH

against the unreserved quota on basis of merit. Ld. Counsel for the

respondents submits that the representation of the applicant was duly

considered and speaking order dated 23.01.2017 was communicated

to him clarifying that he is not due for promotion against the quota

reserved for SC category and his case shall be considered as per his

seniority. It is further submitted that, in the meantime, the applicant

has been promoted to the post of ASH and he has accepted the same

unconditionally and assumed the charge on 27.03.2019. Hence, as

such, there is no cause of action for adjudication by this Tribunal.

                                5                 O.A.No. 260/00091of 2017


3.    Applicant has filed rejoinder, which has been taken into

consideration.





4.    According to the Ld. Counsel for the applicant, the applicant is

entitled to the relief prayed for in this O.A. because the respondents

rejected the case without considering the true merit of the matter

inasmuch as Point Nos. 7 and 15, as per the post based roster, meant

for SC category and Point No. 14 is meant for ST category. If the

version of the respondents is taken to be correct that one Sri

H.P.Verma was promoted and adjusted against Sl. No. 7, roster point at

Sl. No. 15 still remains against which the applicant could have been

promoted. It has been stated that the 14 point roster is applicable for

direct recruitment and not for promotion. The reservation roster

clearly prescribes for the post in a cadre where sanctioned strength is

2 or more but less than 14 shall be applicable in the present case and,

therefore, gross injustice was caused to the applicant in the decision

making process in the matter. On the other hand, Ld. Counsel for the

respondents has submitted that the applicant has in the meantime has

been promoted to the post of ASH. The argument advanced is on

conjecture and surmises without any basis because the roster is

maintained and filled up as per the extant rules. The case of the

                                  6                 O.A.No. 260/00091of 2017





applicant was duly considered with reference to the applicable roster

point/DoP&T O.M. and taking into consideration sanctioned/vacancy

position in the grade of ASH and, there being no illegality, the applicant

is not entitled to the relief claimed in the O.A. Accordingly, Ld. Counsel

for the respondents has prayed for dismissal of the O.A.



5.    We have given careful consideration to the rival contentions

made by both sides and perused the materials on records. Facts

remains that the applicant has in the meantime promoted to the post

of ASH. It is seen that the respondents rejected the grievance of the

applicant on the ground that there are only three sanctioned posts of

ASH in Archaeological Survey of India, which are to be filled up 100%

by promotion. The reservation roster is prescribed for the post in a

cadre where the sanctioned strength is two or more but less than 14,

which shall be applicable in the present case. As per the roster, in

respect of post filled up by promotion the point No. 7 falls against SC

category and point No. 14 for the ST category and the reservation shall

be provided by rotation on the basis of 14 point roster. Since, the post

reserved for SC category was already consumed on the appointment of

Sri H.P.Verma against the reserved quota. The vacancy which would

arise up to the 14th point shall be filled up under the unreserved quota

                                 7                  O.A.No. 260/00091of 2017





and one Sri Naresh Chand, although belongs to SC category, he being

senior to the applicant was promoted as ASH against the unreserved

quota on basis of merit.





6.    It is seen that the respondents considered the representation of

the applicant and rejected the same under Annexure-A/10 dated

23.01.2017 on the ground as under:



      WHEREAS the representation of Shri V.P. Mohod has been
      examined vis-à-vis the extant instructions issued by the
      DoP&T with regard to reservation of posts for Scheduled
      Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the matter of promotion and
      the following observations are made in this regard:



       (i) Whereas there being only three sanctioned posts of ASH
         in ASI which are filled up 100% by the method of
         promotion, the reservation roster prescribed for posts in a
         cadre where the sanctioned strength is 2 or more but less
         than 14 shall be applicable in the present case. The
         extracts of instructions issued by the Government in this
         regard are enclosed.

       (ii) As per the above said Roster in respect of post filled up
         by promotion, the point no. 7 falls against SC Category and
         Point No 14 for the ST Category And the reservation shall
         be provided by rotation on the basis of the said 14 point
         roster.



       (iii) As regards the post of ASH in ASI, the post reserved for
         SC Category has already been consumed on the
         appointment of Shri H.P. Verma against the reserved
         quota. A copy of the Minutes of the DPC which had
         recommended the promotion of Shri H.P. Verma is
         enclosed.

       (iv) Therefore, the vacancies which would arise up to the
         14thpoint (reserved for ST) shall be filled up under the
         unreserved quota.

                                   8                   O.A.No. 260/00091of 2017


        (v) Shri Naresh Chand who belongs to SC Category and is
          senior to the applicant was, therefore, promoted as ASH
          against the unreserved quota on merit.



      NOW, THEREFORE, in the light of the above position, the
      Competent Authority after due consideration of the
      representation submitted by Shri VP Mohod, Sr. Horticulture
      Assistant has decided that he is not due for promotion against
      the quota reserved for SC Category. However, he shall be
      considered for promotion as per his seniority.




      From the above it appears that, according to the respondents, point

no. 7 falls against SC Category and Point No 14 for the ST Category.

Thereafter, point no. 15 falls against the SC category as per the Post based

roster for promotion. According to the respondents, the post reserved for

SC category has already been consumed on promotion of Sri H.P.Verma

against the reserved quota at Sl. No. 7. It is the case of the applicant that

the reservation roster prescribed for the post in a cadre where sanctioned

strength is 2 or more but less than 14 shall be applied in his case and as per

the roster in respect of the post in question the point no. 7 falls against SC

category and point no. 14 against ST category and the reservation shall be

provided by rotation on the basis of 14 point roster. The respondents in the

order of rejection so also in the counter did not whisper anything relating to

roster point number 15. It is the specific grievance of the applicant that as

per roster based reservation in promotion cadre of SC at Sl. No. 7 which is

meant for Sl. No. 1 i.e. Sri H.P.Verma since then no SC candidate

                                   9                   O.A.No. 260/00091of 2017





promoted to the post of Asst. Superintending Horticulturist as per the post

based roster dated 02.07.1997 (Annexure-A/4) but Sl. No. 8 was promoted

to the said post on seniority basis. As per record, one post of Asst.

Superintending Horticulturist is vacant and, thus, as per the principle set

out under Annexure-A/4. next roster based reservation is at Sl. No. 15 and

Sl. No. 9 was meant for SC category whereas the respondents filled up the

post meant for SC (Sl. No. 10) and thereafter Sl. No. 11 which is in

violation of the DoP&T order dated 02.07.1997 (Annexure-A/4). Be that as

it may, the order of rejection is conspicuously silent on the above aspect

especially relating to the roster point at Sl. No. 15. Every employee has

genuine expectation to achieve career advancement by way of climbing the

ladder of promotion. When the applicant had apprehended that he has been

treated shabbily in matter of applying the reservation roster, it is expected

that the authority concerned should not leave any room for doubt in the

mind of an employee that his case has not been dealt into in its proper

perspective. On the above count, the irresistible conclusion would be that

the order of rejection was passed without due application of mind by

meeting/answering the points specifically raised by the applicant. In other

words, the order of rejection is arbitrary and hence illegal. Therefore, the

order of rejection under Annexure-A/10 dated 23.01.2017 is hereby

quashed and the matter is remitted back to Respondent No. 2 to reconsider

                                  10                  O.A.No. 260/00091of 2017





the matter afresh after due opportunity to the applicant and pass a reasoned

and speaking order within a period of 120 days from the date of receipt of a

copy of this order.





7.      In view of the aforesaid observations and discussions, this O.A.

stands allowed to the above extent by leaving the parties to bear their

own costs.





(SWARUP KUMAR MISHRA)                   (DEVENDRA CHAUDHRY)
  Member (Judicial)                             Member (Admn.)




RK/PS
 

