



[Cites 
26
, Cited by 
3
]




Calcutta High Court (Appellete Side)


Swapan Kumar Sardar & Ors vs The State Of West Bengal & Ors on 18 November, 2019


Author: 
Rajasekhar Mantha


Bench: 
Rajasekhar Mantha


Form No. J(1)
                              IN THE HIGH COURT AT CALCUTTA
                               CONSTITUTIONAL WRIT JURISDICTION

 Present :

 The Hon'ble Justice Rajasekhar Mantha

                                     W.P. No. 20936 (W) of 2014

                                 Swapan Kumar Sardar & Ors.
                                               -Versus-
                                   The State of West Bengal & Ors.


  For the petitioners:               Mr. Sardar Amjad Ali, Sr. Advocate,
                                     Ms. Sucharita Roy.


  For the KMDA:               Mr. Partha Sarathi Bose,
                                     Mr. Satyajit Talukdar.

 For the State:                      Mr. Tapan Kumar Mukherjee, ld.A.G.P.
                                     Mr. Somnath Naskar.


 Heard on:                           November 18, 2019.


 Judgment on:                        November 18, 2019.


  Rajasekhar Mantha, J.:



 
The principal challenge in the instant writ petition by the employees of

  the Kolkata Metropolitan Development Authority (in short KMDA) is to an order

  dated 22nd January, 2014 passed by the KMDA pursuant to a direction of this

  Court in W.P. No. 842 of 2011 (
Swapan Kumar Sardar & Ors. - Vs. - The State of

  West Bengal & Ors.
).




             The fact leading to the claims of the writ petitioners is that they were

  originally granted a Career Advancement Scheme (CAS), for the purpose of

  improving the administration and service benefits to the direct employees of the
 State Government and State controlled bodies. The said Career Advancement

Scheme was allowed in or about the year 1995 on the recommendation of the

concerned Pay Commission not only to the employees of the State Government

but also to employees of the statutory bodies under it.


          Subsequently, when the 4th Pay Commission was implemented in or

about the year 2002 an improved benefit of a Modified Career Advancement

Scheme (MCAS) was allowed exclusively to the State Government employees.


          It is submitted by the Counsel for the State that although the Pay

Commission was requested to consider the case of employees of statutory bodies

under the control of the State Government, the same was declined.


          Before proceeding further with this order, it is necessary to explain the

difference between the original CAS and subsequently introduced MCAS. The

benefit under the original CAS was in the form of an automatic increment and/or

climbing on to the next pay scale available to those employees, who were

stagnating in their existing pay scale could not otherwise progress in their careers

in two intervals i.e. after the completion of ten years of service (first

advancement/jump to the next higher pay scale) and after completion of 20 years

(second advancement).



          Pursuant to the recommendation of the 4th Pay Commission, the same

benefit   of   career   advancement   (hereinafter   called   the   Modified   Career

Advancement Scheme) was given to the employees at three stages, i.e., after eight

years (first movement), after sixteen years (second advancement) and after twenty
 one years (third advancement) of completion of their services. This was in

replacement of the original Career Advancement Scheme.


       It will not be out of place to mention that both the CAS and MCAS were

allowed based on the similar Schemes allowed to the Central Government

employees.



       The arguments of the employees of KMDA are as follows:


       (a) There is discrimination on the part of the State in allowing the

             benefits of the MCAS to the State Government employees while

             denying the same to the employees of statutory bodies under the

             State;



       (b) A large number of other statutory bodies like Howrah Municipal

             Corporation, Shanti Niketan and Sriniketan Development Authority,

             Haldia Development Authority and West Bengal Pollution Control

             Board etc., have been allowed such benefits. These two of such

             organizations are similarly situated as the KMDA and therefore there

             is a class between the class and or class legislation created by the

             State.



       (c) There is apparent contradictions and mindless fallacy in the

             impugned order where the Principal Secretary, Urban Development

             Department, Government of West Bengal and the Principal Secretary,

             Finance Department, Government of West Bengal on one hand said

             that they could not grant the MCAS to the KMDA employees in view of

             the bar under the 4th Pay Commission but in the same breath
           contended that if the funds of the KMDA permitted such benefits, the

          same could be availed by the employees of KMDA.



       KMDA similar to the Haldia Development Authority and the Shanti

Niketan and Sriniketan Development Authority are constituted and function

under the provisions of the "
West Bengal Town and Country (Planning and

Development) Act, 1979
". 
Section 19
 of the said Act stipulates that the following

persons shall comprise of the governing body of the KMDA -


                   "19. Composition of the 1[Kolkata] Metropolitan Development
                   Authority
                   (1) The 1[Kolkata] Metropolitan Development Authority shall
                   consist of the following members:--

                   (a) the Chief Minister of the State of West Bengal or any
                   person nominated by him shall be the Chairman, and a
                   Minister of the State of West Bengal to be nominated by the
                   Chief Minister shall be the Vice-Chairman:

                   Provided that when there is no Council of Ministers
                   functioning in the State of West Bengal, the State
                   Government shall nominate such persons, as it may think
                   fit, to be the two members and the Chairman and Vice-
                   Chairman respectively of the 1 [Kolkata] Metropolitan
                   Development Authority;

                   (b) the Chief Executive Officer of the 1[Kolkata] Metropolitan
                   Development Authority, ex officio;

                   (c) not more than three officers of the rank of Secretary to the
                   State Government to be nominated by the State Government;
                   and 2

                   (d) not more than five persons to be nominated by the State
                   Government of whom--

                   (i) two shall be Councillors or Aldermen of the 1[Kolkata]
                   Municipal Corporation;

                   (ii) one shall be a Councillor or Alderman of the Howrah
                   Municipal Corporation;

                   (iii) two shall be Commissioners of any municipality within
                   the 1 [Kolkata] Metropolitan Area:

                   Provided that when an order of supersession of the 1
                   [Kolkata] Municipal Corporation or the Howrah Municipal
                   Corporation or the municipality, as the case may be, has
                   been made and is in force, it shall be competent for the State
                     Government to nominate, in place of the Councillors or
                    Aldermen or Commissioners, as the case may be, such
                    persons as have experience in or knowledge of
                    administration of local self-government to be members of the
                    1 [Kolkata] Metropolitan Development Authority:

                    Provided further that on the revocation of the order of
                    supersession as aforesaid, the members nominated under
                    the first proviso shall, notwithstanding that the term of office
                    of such members has not expired, cease to hold office and
                    the vacancies shall be filled up in accordance with the
                    provisions of clause (d).

                    (2) The Vice-Chairman shall discharge such functions and
                    exercise such powers as may be delegated to him by the
                    Chairman and shall, during the absence of the Chairman,
                    perform the functions and exercise the powers of the
                    Chairman.

                    (3) The members referred to in clause (d) of sub-section (1)
                    shall hold office for a term of three years from the date of
                    their nomination by the State Government and shall receive
                    such allowances for attending the meetings of the 1 [Kolkata]
                    Metropolitan Development Authority or any committee
                    thereof, as may be prescribed: 3
                    [Provided that every such member, on ceasing to be a
                    Councillor or Alderman of the 1 [Kolkata] Municipal
                    Corporation or the Howrah Municipal Corporation or
                    Commissioner of a municipality within the 1 [Kolkata]
                    Metropolitan Area, as the case may be, shall,
                    notwithstanding that the term of office of such member has
                    not expired, cease to hold office and the vacancy shall be
                    filled up in accordance with the provisions of clause (d) of
                    sub-section (1).]
                    (4) No act or proceeding of the 1 [Kolkata] Metropolitan
                    Development Authority shall be deemed to be invalid merely
                    by reason of any vacancy in, or defect, initial or subsequent,
                    in the constitution of that Authority"



       The finance, accounts and audit of the KMDA are required to be governed

by 
Sections 107
 to 
114
 of the aforesaid Act of 1979. 
Section 107
, 
108
 & 
109


stipulates as follows:



                    "107. (1) Every Planning Authority or Development Authority
                    (other than the [Kolkata] Metropolitan Development
 Authority) shall have and maintain its own fund to which
shall be credited-

    (a) all moneys received by the said Authority from the
State Government by way of grants, loans, advances or
otherwise;

    (b) all development charges or other charges or fees
received by the said Authority under this Act or rules or
regulations made thereunder : and

    (c) all moneys received by the said Authority from any
other source.

(2) Every such Authority may keep in current account in any
branch of the State Bank of India or any other Bank
approved by the State Government in this behalf, such
portion of its fund as may be prescribed and any money in
excess of the said sum shall be invested in such manner as
may be approved by the State Government.



108. Fund of the 1 [Kolkata] Metropolitan Development
Authority
      (1) There shall be a fund for the 1[Kolkata]
Metropolitan Development Authority to which shall be
credited--

      (a) such moneys as may be paid to it by the State
Government under the Taxes on Entry of Goods into 1
[Kolkata] Metropolitan Area Act, 1972;

      (b) all moneys borrowed by it;

      (c) such other moneys as may be received by it from
the State Government or from any other authority or source.

      (2) The 1 [Kolkata] Metropolitan Development Authority
shall maintain a sinking fund for the repayment of money
borrowed by it, and shall every year deposit into the said
fund such moneys as may be paid to it by the State
Government under the Taxes on Entry of Goods into 1
[Kolkata] Metropolitan Area Act, 1972.

      (3) The money paid into the sinking fund shall be
invested in such manner and in such securities as may be
prescribed.

      (4) The sinking fund or any part thereof shall be
applied in, or towards, the discharge of the loan or part
thereof for which such fund was created, and until such loan
or part thereof is wholly discharged, the money standing to
the credit of the fund shall be applied for no other purpose.



109 - Grants and advances by State Government
The State Government may make such grants, advances and
loans to any Planning Authority or Development Authority
                    (including the 1 [Kolkata] Metropolitan Development
                   Authority) as it may deem necessary for the performance of
                   the functions under this Act and all such grants, loans and
                   advances made shall be on such terms and conditions as the
                   State Government may determine."



       The sources of fund of KMDA are set out in 
Section 108
. In addition

thereto, 
Section 109
 of the Act of 1979 stipulates that the State Government

may make such grants and advances and loans to any planning authority or

development authority including the KMDA as it may deem necessary for the

performance of the functions under the Act. It is further stipulated that all such

grants, loans and advances made, shall be on such terms and conditions as the

State Government may determined.



       To address the first argument raised on behalf of the petitioners that

there is discrimination between the facilities granted to the direct employees of

the State Government and those employees of statutory bodies, it is now well

settled that the same do not stand on the similar footing. Employees of statutory

bodies are governed not only by the act under which they are constituted but

also have independent bye-laws, Rules and Regulations not only governing their

functions but also the terms and conditions of the service of their employees.


       The first argument advanced on behalf of the petitioners, therefore, has

to be answered in negative.



       The second argument raised is that the employees of the some

development authorities similarly situated like KMDA is also governed under the

aforesaid Act of 1979 yet have been granted such benefits and the employees of

KMDA have been denied the benefits of MCAS.

        The impugned order addresses this issue by first contending that such

authorities and other organizations like Haldia Development Authority, West

Bengal Pollution Control Board and Howrah Improvement Trust and West

Bengal Housing Board have granted the benefits of MCAS since they have funds

of their own in this regard and the KMDA does not.



 
Article 14
 permits reasonable classification but does not permit class

legislation. The equal protection of laws guaranteed by 
Article 14
 does not mean

that all laws must be general in character. It does not mean that the same laws

should apply to all persons. It does not attainment or circumstances in the same

position. The varying needs of different classes of persons often requires

separate treatment. From the very nature of society there should be different

laws in different places and the legitimate controls the policy and enacts laws in

the best interest of the safety and security of the state. In fact identical

treatment in unequal circumstances would amount to inequality. So a

reasonable classification is only not permitted but is necessary if society is to

progress.



       Thus what 
Article 14
 forbids is class-legislation but it does not forbid

reasonable classification. The classification however must not be "arbitrary

,artificial or evasive" but must be based on some real and substantial bearing a

just and reasonable relation to the object sought to be achieved by the

legislation. 
Article 14
 applies where equals are treated differently without any

reasonable basis. But where equals and unequals are treated differently, 
Article

14
 does not apply. Class legislation is that which makes an improper
 discrimination by conferring particular privileges upon a class of        persons

arbitrarily selected from a large number of persons all of whom stand in the

same relation to the privilege granted that between whom and the persons not so

favored no reasonable distinction or substantial difference can be found

justifying the inclusion of one and the exclusion of the other from such privilege.

Reference may be made to the decision of the Supreme Court in the following

cases.



 
In the case of 
D.S. Nakara v. Union Of India
 reported in 1983 AIR 130,

1983 SCR (2) 165, the Supreme Court contended as follows:


              "The Government issued an office memorandum announcing a
              liberalized pension scheme for retired government servants but
              made it applicable to those who had retired after 31 March 1979.
              The Supreme Court held that the fixing of the cut off date to be
              discriminatory as violating 
Article 14.
 The division of pensioners
              into two classes on the basis of the date of retirement was not
              based on any rational principle because a difference of two days in
              the matter of retirement could have a traumatic effect on the
              pensioner. Such a classification held to be arbitrary and
              unprincipled as there was no acceptable or persuasive reason in its
              favour. The said classification had no rational nexus with the
              object sought to achieve."



 
In the case of 
Madhu Limaye v. Supdt. Tihar Jail Delhi
, reported in

1975 AIR 1505, 1975 SCR (3) 582, the Supreme Court contended as follows:


              "There were Indian and Europian Prisoners. Both were treated
              differently. Europian gets better diet. Court held that difference
              between Indian and Europian prisoners in the matter of treatment
              and diet violates right to equality under 
Article 14
 of Indian
              prisoners. They all are prisoners they must treat equally."

        It was also contended that no prior permission of the State Government

was taken before extending such benefit in view of the denial of MCAS to non

State Government employees under the 4th Pay Commission.


       While the argument has made in the impugned order by two responsible

Principal Secretaries of State Government, who are the Senior IAS Officers,

appears to be ex facie contradictory and self-defeating, Counsel for the State

would rely upon the fact that merely because an error is committed in the case

of certain bodies, this similar erroneous benefit cannot be derived by the

employees of the KMDA.



       This Court refers to the doctrine of negative equality evolved in the

following cases.



 
In the case of 
Union of India v. International Trading Co.
, reported in

       (2003) 5 SCC 437 at page 444, Para 13, the Supreme Court held as

       follows:




             "13. What remains now to be considered, is the effect of
             permission granted to the thirty two vessels. As highlighted by
             learned counsel for the appellants, even if it is accepted that there
             was any improper permission, that may render such permissions
             vulnerable so far as the thirty two vessels are concerned, but it
             cannot come to the aid of the respondents. It is not necessary to
             deal with that aspect because two wrongs do not make one right. A
             party cannot claim that since something wrong has been done in
             another case direction should be given for doing another wrong. It
             would not be setting a wrong right, but would be perpetuating
             another wrong. In such matters there is no discrimination involved.
             The concept of equal treatment on the logic of 
Article 14
 of the
             Constitution of India (in short "the Constitution") cannot be
             pressed into service in such cases. What the concept of equal
             treatment presupposes is existence of similar legal foothold. It does
             not countenance repetition of a wrong action to bring both wrongs
             on a par. Even if hypothetically it is accepted that a wrong has
              been committed in some other cases by introducing a concept of
             negative equality the respondents cannot strengthen their case.
             They have to establish strength of their case on some other basis
             and not by claiming negative equality."

                                                  (emphasis added)

       In the case of M/S Vedanta Aluminium Limited vs Union of India

       (RVWPET No.218 of 2011) at Paragraph 17, the Orissa High Court held

       as follows:



              "17. Even assuming for the sake of argument that any benefit was
             extended to a similarly situated Company, namely, Jindal Power
             Limited under the Office Memorandum dated 16.11.2010, the
             petitioner has no legal right to claim similar benefit for the reason
             that there is no concept of negative equality.



             A party cannot claim that if something wrong has been done in any
             case, similar direction should be given for doing the wrong again.
             No illegality should be allowed to perpetuate under the shelter
             of 
Article 14
 of the Constitution. 
Article 14
 does not envisage
             for negative equality, and no one can be permitted to take benefit
             of negative equality."

                                                                (emphasis added)

       It is now well settled that the negative equality is not permitted under


Article 14
 of the Constitution of India. The doctrine of negative equality has

already explained by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the above cited

cases is that no body can claim benefit from a wrongful gain made by similarly

situated persons.



       While this Court may have sympathy for the writ petitioners in this

regard, the conduct of the State Government in failing to monitor the activities

and functions of those other statutory bodies cannot be but deprecated.      It is

expected that remedial measures shall be taken by the State in respect of the
 Statutory bodies. This Court is not free from doubt that they are more favorite

statutory body/employees in the State than the employees of the KMDA

        The only argument advanced on behalf of the State that needs to be dealt

with by this Court is in terms of 
Section 139
 of the aforesaid 1972 Act. 
Section

139
 of the aforesaid Act of 1979 stipulates as follows:


                 "
Section 139
 - Power to make regulations
                 Any Planning Authority or Development Authority may, with the
                 previous approval of the State Government, make regulations
                 consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder, to
                 carry out the purposes of this Act and without prejudice to the
                 generality of this power such regulations may provide for,--

                 (a) the time and place of holding and procedure to be followed
                 in meetings of the Planning Authority, Development Authority
                 and Advisory Committee, and the number of members
                 necessary to form a quorum therein;

                 (b) the powers and duties of the officers and employees of the
                 Planning Authority and Development Authority;

                 (c) the salaries, allowances and conditions of service of its
                 officers and employees;

                 (d) the terms and conditions for the continuance of use of any
                 land used otherwise than in conformity with a development
                 plan; and

                 (e) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed by
                 rules."



        Sub-Section (C) of 
Section 139
 clearly indicates that the power to frame

regulations for the purpose of governing the salaries, allowances and conditions

of service of its officers and employees is vested in the KMDA but the same has to

be made in consultation with the State Government.


        Mr. Ali, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the writ petitioners, relies

upon 
Section 29
 by saying that when the State Government is already in majority

in the governing body of KMDA the consent of the State Government is to an idle

formality and that once the Board of KMDA passes a salary that is empowered to
 frame regulation governing the salaries and emoluments to its employee, and if

the same including the MCAS such regulations and/or rules must have deemed

approval of the State Government.



       This Court seizes some force in such argument but is reminded of the

well settled principle that there is no estoppel against the law. The aforesaid

principle applies not only in the context of 
Section 139(6)
 read with 
Section 29
 of

the aforesaid 1972 Act but also in the context of the denial by the 4th Pay

Commission Authorities of MCAS to the persons similarly placed like the

petitioner, i.e., employees of the statutory bodies albeit under the control of the

State Government.



       The following Supreme Court ruling resonate the principle of "no estoppel

against the law":



 
In the case of 
Dunlop India Ltd vs Union Of India And Ors
, reported in

1977 AIR 597, 1976 SCR (2) 98, the Supreme Court held as follows:




              "At one stage Mr. Sanghi pointed out that in certain Bills of Entry
              of Dunlop India Limited, their Agents, Messrs Mackinnon.
              Mackenzie & Co., Private Ltd., gave the I.T.C. item No. 87 with
              regard to the imported V.P. Latex. This according to Mr. Sanghi
              clearly shows how the appellants themselves have understood the
              matter. There is, however, no estoppel in law against a party in a
              taxation matter. In order to clear the goods for the customs, the
              appellants' Agents may have given the classification in accordance
              with the wishes of the authorities or they may even be under some
              misapprehension. But when law allows them the right to ask for
              refund on a proper appraisement and which they actually applied
              for, we do not attach any significance to this aspect of the matter
              pointed out by counsel. The question is of General importance and
              must be decided on its merits."



 
(emphasis added)
       In the case of 
Jalandhar Improvement Trust vs Sampuran

Singh
, reported in 1347, JT 1999 (2) SC 598, (1999) 122 PLR 295,

1999 (2) SCALE 415, (1999) 3 SCC 494, the Supreme Court held as

follows:






       "13. The High Court as well as the lower appellate court also relied
      upon the fact that the Trust had made similar preferential
      allotments as local displaced person in favour of other persons.
      Therefore, the courts below came to the conclusion that even the
      plaintiffs-respondents were entitled to such allotment. In our
      opinion, before coming to this conclusion the courts below should
      have first decided the question whether the allotment in favour of
      those persons was within the scope of the Rules applicable. If it
      was not within the scope of the Rules then even those allotments in
      favour of other persons will not create a right in the respondents to
      claim equality with them; may be, if the allotments were made
      wrongly in favour of those persons, the same may become liable for
      cancellation, if permissible in law, but that will not create an
      enforceable right on the respondents to claim similar wrongful
      allotments in their favour. In our opinion, even this ground relied
      upon by the High Court as well as the lower appellate court is
      unsustainable. The courts below next relied upon the fact that in
      regard to some of the respondents, the Trust itself at a point of
      time made allotments and accepted initial deposits towards the
      consideration of the plot which was subsequently cancelled. Based
      on those facts, the courts below held that the Trust having once
      allotted the plots and having collected part of the consideration, it
      could not have cancelled the allotments, probably basing the
      respondents' case on the principle of promissory estoppel. Here the
      courts below have failed to notice the legal principle that there is
      no estoppel against law. The allotment of plots by the Trust is
      controlled by the statutory Rules. Any allotment contrary to those
      Rules will be against the law. Since the allotments made in favour
      of some of the respondents was based on wrong application of the
      reservation made for "local displaced person" those allotments were
      contrary        to law.      Hence,        the       principle     of
      promissory/equitable estoppel cannot be invoked to protect such
      illegal allotments. In the said view of the matter, we are unable to
      sustain the judgments and decrees impugned in these appeals."



 
(emphasis added)
       In the case of 
Bennett Coleman & Co. (P) Ltd vs Punya Priya Das

Gupta
, reported in 1970 AIR 426, 1970 SCR (1) 181, the Supreme

Court held as follows:




     "The respondent thereafter applied to the Delhi Administration and
    the latter, as aforesaid, referred his claim to the Labour Court for
    adjudication. In his statement of claim before the Labour Court, the
    respondent claimed that the monthly wages payable to him were Rs.
    700 basic, Rs. 497 as dearness allowance, Rs. 200 conveyance
    allowance and Rs. 50 being the estimated value of the benefit of a
    free telephone and newspapers, aggregating Rs. 1,447 per month.
    He claimed gratuity computable on the basis of Rs. 1,447 as being
    his monthly wages, Rs. 1,447 as compensation for the month's
    leave, in all, Rs. 6,000.34 P. He did not deduct from the said claim
    the said amount of Rs. 2,810.47 P. as he had not encashed the
    cheque given to him against the receipt dated November 21, 1963.
    The company in its written statement denied the claim relying on the
    said receipt and further denied that the car allowance and the
    monetary value for the free telephone and newspapers could be
    included in the wages payable to the respondent either as due to
    him or for calculating gratuity. Before the Labour Court the
    company did not dispute the value of the benefit of the free
    telephone and newspapers estimated by the respondent, but it
    raised the question whether the said value and the car allowance
    formed part of the respondent's wages and whether the amount of
    gratuity payable to him could be ascertained on the footing of their
    being part of his wages. The Labour Court held that there was no
    evidence that the car allowance was not payable to the respondent
    while he was on leave as was the case in respect of another working
    journalist, C. V. Vishwanath, whose claim also the Labour Court
    was trying along with that of the respondent. The Labour Court
    found this difference a significant one and held that the car
    allowance had to be taken as part of the wages. The Labour Court
    also held that the car allowance and the free telephone and
    newspapers were an allowance and an amenity respectively falling
    under the definition L 12 Sup CI/69-13 of
 s. 2 (rr)
 of the Industrial
    Disputes Act, 1947, both forming the component parts of monthly
     wages payable to the respondent,. As regards the leave, the
    respondent was undoubtedly entitled to 30 days leave. But the
    company's plea was, firstly, that its rules did not permit
    compensation for such leave and secondly, that it was set off against
    the period of notice which the respondent was required to give. No
    rules, however, were produced to show that they contained any
    provision disallowing such compensation. As regards the notice
    period of one month, the Labour Court held that as the resignation
    dated October 8, 1963 was accepted with effect from October 21,
    1963 there was compliance of 13 days only and therefore the
    management was not liable to pay for the balance of 17 days leave.
    The Labour Court rejected the company's plea that the receipt given
    by the respondent in full settlement of all his claims estopped him
    from making these claims on the ground that as these items were
    claimable under the Act there could be no estoppel against law. In
    the result, the Labour Court held that the respondent was entitled to
    claim car allowance at Rs. 200 per month, Rs. 50 per month for
    telephone and news- papers and compensation for 13 days leave,
    that the first two were parts of his wages, that his monthly
    remuneration was, therefore, Rs. 1,447 and gratuity equivalent to 51
    months wages would have to be calculated on the basis of Rs. 1,447
    being his wages per month and directed the company to pay on the
    aforesaid calculations Rs. 2,002 over and above Rs. 2,810.47 P. for
    which the company had issued the said cheque."



 
(emphasis added)



     In   the   case   of   
C.   Beepathumma      And    Ors.     vs   V.S.

Kadambolithaya And Ors.
, reported in AIR 1965 SC 241, 1964 5 SCR

836, the Supreme Court held as follows:




 
"18. Mr. S. T. Desai learned counsel for the appellants admits that
     the mortgagors had not lost their right to the properties comprised
     in Ex. P-2 and that Ex. P-2 incorporated Ex. P-1. Exs. P-63 and P-
     63(a) were filed to establish the connection which, in view of the
     admission, it is not necessary to set forth here. He also admits that
     he cannot make out case under 
Art. 134
 of the 
Indian Limitation
      Act
. He contends that the doctrine of election is but a species of
     estoppel and there can be no estoppel against law especially
     against the 
Limitation Act
, because of
 s. 3
 of that Act. He relies
     upon a decision of the Madras High Court reported in 
Sitarama
     Chetty and Anr. v. Krishnaswami Chetty
 [(1915) I.L.R. Mad., 38,


 
374.] where White C.J. quoting a passage from Mr. Mitra's book on
     the Law of Limitation, observes that an agreement by a person
     against whom a cause of action has arisen, that he would not take
     advantage of the statute, cannot affect its operation on the original
     cause of action, unless such agreement amounts to an
     acknowledgment of liability which the statute recognises as an
     exception to the rule. Mr. Desai also relies upon 
Govardhan Das v.
     Dau Dayal
 [(1932) I.L.R. 54 All. 573.] for the proposition that no
     one can contract himself out of the statute of limitation, nor can
     estoppel be pleaded against a statutory bar of limitation. Some
     other cases cited by him are not in point and need not be
     mentioned. On the basis of these cases, Mr. Desai contends that
     unless Exs. P-2 and P-2(a) can be pleaded as an acknowledgment
     limitation cannot be saved in respect of Kunhi Pakki's share and
     the suit itself must be dismissed under
 s. 3
 of the Limitation Act.
     He contends that the equitable doctrine of election does not apply
     to the present case, because the documents on which reliance is
     placed refer not to the 1/4th share of Kunhi Pakki but to the
     3/16th share of Cheriamma which Kunhi Pakki subsequently
     obtained. He states that the latter conclusion is inescapable if Exs.
     P-59, P-60 and P-61 are read together. He submits that in these
     documents Kunhi Pakki no doubt connected the 3/16th share with
     Exs. P-2 and P-2(a) but treated his own 1/4th share separately."




 
In the case of 
State Of Rajasthan And Anr vs Surendra Mohnot

And Ors
 (Civil Appeal Nos. 5860-5861 of 2014) reported in (2014) 14

SCC 77 at Paragraph 17 the Supreme Court held as follows:


       "17.   It   is   well   settled  in law that   there   can   be
       no estoppel against law. Consent given in a court that a
       controversy is covered by a judgment which has no applicability
       whatsoever and pertains to a different field, cannot estopp the
                 party from raising the point that the same was erroneously
                cited."



 
(emphasis added)

              In the case of 
Rajendra Jha vs Presiding Officer, Labour
 Court,

        reported in 1984 AIR 1696, 1985 SCR (1) 544, the Supreme Court held

        as follows:






               "In order to get over these difficulties, it is urged by the appellant
              that there can be no estoppel against law and therefore, it is open
              to him to argue even at this stage that the Labour Court ought not
              to have passed the particular order. In support of this contention
              reliance is placed by the appellant on two judgments of this Court.



 
In 
Chitturi Subbanna v. Kudapapa          Subbanna
, it was held by the
              majority that pure questions of           law, not dependent on the
              determination of any questions of         fact, should be allowed to be
              raised for the first time even at later   stages of a litigation."




                                                                    (emphasis added)


        It is, however, made clear that in the event the petitioners or the KMDA

Authorities duly represented by the State Government, approach the next

available Pay Commission for granting of MCAS benefits to employees of

statutory corporation and other authorities similarly situated like the petitioners,

the MCAS Authorities will do so in accordance with law and bearing in mind the

principles enshrined in 
Article 14
 of the Constitution of India.


        In view of the aforesaid, this Court is unable to grant any benefit to the

petitioners and hence the writ petition does not succeed and is disposed of

without any order.



        There will be, however, no order as to costs.

         Urgent photostat certified copy of this order, if applied for, be given to the

parties upon compliance of all formalities.





                                                               (Rajasekhar Mantha, J.)
 

