



[Cites 
30
, Cited by 
18
]




Supreme Court of India


Dinesh Kumar Gupta vs The Honble High Court For Judicature Of ... on 29 April, 2020


Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 2270, AIRONLINE 2020 SC 497


Author: 
Uday Umesh Lalit


Bench: 
Vineet Saran
, 
Uday Umesh Lalit


Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.
Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.

                                                                               1
                                                                    Reportable

                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                     CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.936 OF 2018


     Dinesh Kumar Gupta and others                             …Petitioners

                                       Versus

     High Court of Judicature of Rajasthan others             …Respondent

                                       WITH

                 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.967 OF 2018

                                       WITH

                WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.1471 OF 2018

                                       WITH

                 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.498 OF 2019

                                       WITH

                 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.464 OF 2019

                                       WITH

               WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.               OF 2020
                         (D.NO.13252/2019)

                                       WITH

                 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.899 OF 2019

                                       WITH
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.
Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.

                                                                                2

                 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.897 OF 2019

                                        WITH

                 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.895 OF 2019

                                         AND

                WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.1008 OF 2019


                               JUDGMENT



     Uday Umesh Lalit, J.



     1.     These Writ Petitions broadly fall in following three categories:-



 
A]      Writ Petition (Civil) No. 936 of 2018 filed by four

           petitioners, prays for appropriate directions that after the

           promulgation of Rajasthan Judicial Service Rules, 2010 (“2010

           Rules”, for short), all appointments ought to be in conformity with

           2010 Rules and allocation of seniority must be in accordance with

           the Cyclic Order provided in Schedule VII to 2010 Rules. In terms

           of 2010 Rules, posts in the cadre of District Judges in the Higher

           Judicial Service in State of Rajasthan were required to be filled up in

           accordance with quota of 50% for Promotees, 25% for Direct

           Recruits and 25% by way of Limited Competitive Examination
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               3


 
(“LCE”, for short) in keeping with law 
laid down by
 this Court in

           
All India Judges Association vs. Union of India and Others
 1.




           This Writ Petition filed by candidates who were successful in LCE

           prays that they be allocated seniority in terms of the Cyclic Order in

           Schedule VII. In this group fall Writ Petition (Civil) No.498 of 2018

           and Writ Petition Diary No.13252 of 2019 which pray that the inter

           se seniority between candidates who were successful in LCE must

           be determined on the basis of their merit in LCE and not by their

           erstwhile seniority.



           B]         Writ Petition (Civil) No. 967 of 2018 has been filed by 37

           Direct Recruits challenging the Provisional Seniority List dated

           16.08.2017 with regard to the cadre of District Judges in the Higher

           Judicial Service in the State, on the ground that the appointments

           made after 2010 Rules had come into effect, ought to be in

           accordance with the Cyclic Order; and the inter se seniority and

           placement of Direct Recruits and Promotees, promoted after 2010

           Rules had come into effect must be in accordance with 2010 Rules.



 
C]         Writ Petition (Civil) No.1471 of 2018 has been filed by

           Rajasthan Judicial Service Officers Association (“the Association”,
     1 (2002)   4 SCC 247
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               4


           for short) seeking benefit of ad-hoc/officiating service put in by

           Promotees who were promoted on ad-hoc basis as Fast Track Court

           Judges and also prays for re-determination of vacancies of Direct

           Recruits submitting that the vacancies earmarked for Direct Recruits

           were in excess of their quota. Writ Petition (C) Nos.464 of 2019,

           895 of 2019, 897 of 2019, 899 of 2019 and 1008 of 2018 are filed by

           Judicial Officers seeking similar benefit in respect of ad-



           hoc/officiating service as Fast Track Court Judges in the State and

           pray that such candidates be placed above the Direct Recruits in the

           cadre of District Judges in the State.



     2.      Since the issues involved in all these matters pertain to

     appointments to and allocation of seniority in respect of, the cadre of

     District Judges in the State of Rajasthan and regarding effect of 2010

     Rules, the petitions were heard together. Before we deal with the factual

     aspects, it would be necessary to consider certain decisions of this Court

     touching upon the establishment of Fast Track Courts as well as the

     concept of promotion through LCE and the respective quotas for

     candidates coming from three different streams in the Higher Judicial

     Service in various States.

 
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                                 5


     2.1.     
In 
All India Judges’ Association v. Union of India
 and others2,

     the issues with regard to the working conditions of the members of the

     subordinate judiciary throughout the country came up for consideration.




 
Number of directions were issued by this Court.              However, review

     petitions     were       filed   by    Union    of   India   seeking   certain

     modifications/clarifications. These review petitions were disposed of by

     this Court while issuing further directions in 
All India Judges’

     Association and others v. Union of India
 and others3. In pursuance of

     said directions, First National Judicial Pay Commission under the

     Chairmanship of Mr. Justice K.J. Shetty (former Judge of this Court) was

     constituted on 21.03.1996.            The terms of reference were thereafter

     modified on 16.12.1997 and the Commission was also empowered to

     consider and grant interim relief.         By Report dated 31.01.1998 some

     interim relief was granted by Justice Shetty Commission. After due

     deliberations Justice Shetty Commission submitted a Report on

     11.11.1999 and all the States/ Union Territories were directed by this

     Court4 to send their responses to Union of India so that all the issues could

     be deliberated upon and dealt with.4



      2   (1992) 1 SCC 119
      3   (1993) 4 SCC 288
      4    (2002) 4 SCC 274
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.


Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               6


 
2.2    After considering all the submissions, this Court in its decision

     dated 21.03.2002 in 
All India Judges’ Association and others v. Union of

     India
 and others1 passed some directions. We are presently concerned

     with the observations made in paragraphs 24 to 29 in which reference was

     made to the 85th Report of the Standing Committee of Parliament

     recommending that there should be increase in the number of Judges.




     Said Committee had noted the Judges to Population ratio and in tune with

     120th Report of the Law Commission, recommendations were made to

     increase the Judges’ strength to 50 Judges per 10 lakh people in the first

     instance. Recommendations made by Justice Shetty Commission were

     also considered and recruitment to the Higher Judicial Service in the cadre

     of District Judges was also subject-matter of directions. Paragraphs 27 to

     29 are quoted for ready reference:



 
“27. Another question which falls for consideration is
               the method of recruitment to the posts in the cadre of
               Higher Judicial Service i.e. District Judges and
               Additional District Judges. At the present moment,
               there are two sources for recruitment to the Higher
               Judicial Service, namely, by promotion from amongst
               the members of the Subordinate Judicial Service and
               by direct recruitment. The subordinate judiciary is the
               foundation of the edifice of the judicial system. It is,
               therefore, imperative, like any other foundation, that it
               should become as strong as possible. The weight on
               the judicial system essentially rests on the subordinate
               judiciary.    While     we     have      accepted    the
               recommendation of the Shetty Commission which
               will result in the increase in the pay scales of the
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               7


               subordinate judiciary, it is at the same time necessary
               that the judicial officers, hard-working as they are,
               become more efficient. It is imperative that they keep
               abreast of knowledge of law and the latest
               pronouncements, and it is for this reason that the
               Shetty Commission has               recommended the
               establishment of a Judicial Academy, which is very
               necessary. At the same time, we are of the opinion
               that there has to be certain minimum standard,
               objectively adjudged, for officers who are to enter the
               Higher Judicial Service as Additional District Judges
               and District Judges. While we agree with the Shetty
               Commission that the recruitment to the Higher
               Judicial Service i.e. the District Judge cadre from
               amongst the advocates should be 25 per cent and the
               process of recruitment is to be by a competitive
               examination, both written and viva voce, we are of the
               opinion that there should be an objective method of
               testing the suitability of the subordinate judicial
               officers for promotion to the Higher Judicial Service.
               Furthermore, there should also be an incentive
               amongst the relatively junior and other officers to
               improve and to compete with each other so as to excel
               and get quicker promotion. In this way, we expect that
               the calibre of the members of the Higher Judicial
               Service will further improve. 
In order to achieve this,
               while the ratio of 75 per cent appointment by
               promotion and 25 per cent by direct recruitment to the
               Higher Judicial Service is maintained, we are,
               however, of the opinion that there should be two
               methods as far as appointment by promotion is
               concerned: 50 per cent of the total posts in the Higher
               Judicial Service must be filled by promotion on the
               basis of principle of merit-cum-seniority. For this
               purpose, the High Courts should devise and evolve a
               test in order to ascertain and examine the legal
               knowledge of those candidates and to assess their
               continued efficiency with adequate knowledge of
               case-law. The remaining 25 per cent of the posts in
               the service shall be filled by promotion strictly on the
               basis of merit through the limited departmental
               competitive examination for which the qualifying
               service as a Civil Judge (Senior Division) should be
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               8


               not less than five years. The High Courts will have to
               frame a rule in this regard.



                                                             (emphasis
                                                supplied)

               28. As a result of the aforesaid, to recapitulate, we
               direct that recruitment to the Higher Judicial Service
               i.e. the cadre of District Judges will be:

               (1) (a) 50 per cent by promotion from amongst the
                     Civil Judges (Senior Division) on the basis of
                     principle of merit-cum-seniority and passing a
                     suitability test;

                     (b) 25 per cent by promotion strictly on the basis
                     of merit through limited competitive examination
                     of Civil Judges (Senior Division) having not less
                     than five years’ qualifying service; and

                     (c) 25 per cent of the posts shall be filled by
                     direct recruitment from amongst the eligible
                     advocates on the basis of the written and viva
                     voce test conducted by respective High Courts.
               (2) Appropriate rules shall be framed as above by the
               High Courts as early as possible.



 
29. Experience has shown that there has been a
               constant discontentment amongst the members of the
               Higher Judicial Service in regard to their seniority in
               service. For over three decades a large number of
               cases have been instituted in order to decide the
               relative seniority from the officers recruited from the
               two different sources, namely, promotees and direct
               recruits. As a result of the decision today, there will,
               in a way, be three ways of recruitment to the Higher
               Judicial Service. The quota for promotion which we
               have prescribed is 50 per cent by following the
               principle “merit-cum-seniority”, 25 per cent strictly
               on merit by limited departmental competitive
               examination and 25 per cent by direct recruitment.
               Experience has also shown that the least amount of
               litigation in the country, where quota system in
               recruitment exists, insofar as seniority is concerned, is
               where a roster system is followed. For example, there
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                                     9


 
is, as per the rules of the Central Government, a 40-
                 point roster which has been prescribed which deals
                 with the quotas for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
                 Tribes. Hardly, if ever, there has been a litigation
                 amongst the members of the service after their
                 recruitment as per the quotas, the seniority is fixed by
                 the roster points and irrespective of the fact as to
                 when a person is recruited. When roster system is
                 followed, there is no question of any dispute arising.
                 The 40-point roster has been considered and approved
                 by this Court in 
R.K. Sabharwal v. State of Punjab5
.
                 One of the methods of avoiding any litigation and
                 bringing about certainty in this regard is by specifying
                 quotas in relation to posts and not in relation to the
                 vacancies. This is the basic principle on the basis of
                 which the 40-point roster works.
 
We direct the High
                 Courts to suitably amend and promulgate seniority
                 rules on the basis of the roster principle as approved
                 by this Court in 
R.K. Sabharwal
 case as early as
                 possible. We hope that as a result thereof there would
                 be no further dispute in the fixation of seniority. It is
                 obvious that this system can only apply prospectively
                 except where under the relevant rules seniority is to
                 be determined on the basis of quota and rotational
                 system. The existing relative seniority of the members
                 of the Higher Judicial Service has to be protected but
                 the roster has to be evolved for the future. Appropriate
                 rules and methods will be adopted by the High Courts
                 and approved by the States, wherever necessary by
                 31-3-2003.”


     2.3.
 
Soon thereafter, in its decision rendered on 06.05.2002 in 
Brij

     Mohan Lal v. Union of India
 and others6 this Court had an occasion to

     consider the issue relating to Fast Track Courts.               The 11 th Finance

     Commission had allocated Rs.502.90 crores for the purpose of setting up


      5    (1995) 2 SCC 745
      6   (2002) 5 SCC 1
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.


Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               10


     1734 courts in various States to deal with long pending cases, particularly

     sessions cases. On the basis of said recommendations a note was prepared

     by the Department of Justice, Government of India to set up Fast Track

     Courts. Challenges were raised in some High Courts to the constitution of

     such Fast Track Courts and the matters were dealt by this Court in

     Transfer Petitions. After considering rival submissions, directions were

     issued in para 10 and for the present purposes direction Nos.1 to 8, 14 and

     18 are relevant:-



               “10. Keeping in view the laudable objectives with
               which the Fast Track Courts Scheme has been
               conceived and introduced, we feel the following
               directions, for the present, would be sufficient to take
               care of initial teething problems highlighted by the
               parties:

               Directions by the Court

                   1. The first preference for appointment of judges
               of the Fast Track Courts is to be given by ad-hoc
               promotions from amongst eligible judicial officers.

               While giving such promotion, the High Court shall
               follow the procedures in force in the matter of
               promotion to such posts in Superior/Higher Judicial
               Services.

                   2. The second preference in appointments to Fast
               Track Courts shall be given to retired judges who
               have good service records with no adverse comments
               in their ACRs, so far as judicial acumen, reputation
               regarding honesty, integrity and character are
               concerned. Those who were not given the benefit of
               two years’ extension of the age of superannuation,
               shall not be considered for appointment. It should be
               ensured that they satisfy the conditions 
laid down in


Articles 233(2)
 and 
309
 of the Constitution. The High
               Court concerned shall take a decision with regard to
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               11


               the minimum-maximum age of eligibility to ensure
               that they are physically fit for the work in Fast Track
               Courts.

                   3. No judicial officer who was dismissed or
               removed or compulsorily retired or made to seek
               retirement shall be considered for appointment under
               the Scheme. Judicial officers who have sought
               voluntary retirement after initiation of departmental
               proceedings/inquiry shall not be considered for
               appointment.

                   4. The third preference shall be given to members
               of the Bar for direct appointment in these courts. They
               should be preferably in the age group of 35-45 years,
               so that they could aspire to continue against the
               regular posts if the Fast Track Courts cease to
               function. The question of their continuance in service
               shall be reviewed periodically by the High Court
               based on their performance. They may be absorbed in
               regular vacancies, if subsequent recruitment takes
               place and their performance in the Fast Track Courts
               is found satisfactory. For the initial selection, the High
               Court shall adopt such methods of selection as are
               normally followed for selection of members of the
               Bar as direct recruits to the Superior/Higher Judicial
               Services.

                   5. Overall preference for appointment in Fast
               Track Courts shall be given to eligible officers who
               are on the verge of retirement subject to they being
               physically fit.

                   6. The recommendation for selection shall be
               made by a committee of at least three Judges of the
               High Court, constituted by the Chief Justice of the
               High Court concerned in this regard. The final
               decision in the matter shall be taken by the Full Court
               of the High Court.

 
7. After ad-hoc promotion of judicial officers to
               the Fast Track Courts, the consequential vacancies
               shall be filled up immediately by organizing a special
               recruitment drive. Steps should be taken in advance to
               initiate process for selection to fill up these vacancies
               much before the judicial officers are promoted to the
               Fast Track Courts, so that vacancies may not be
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               12


               generated at the lower levels of the subordinate
               judiciary. The High Court and the State Government
               concerned shall take prompt steps to fill up the
               consequential as well as existing vacancies in the
               subordinate courts on priority basis. The State
               Government concerned shall take necessary decisions
               within a month from the receipt of the
               recommendations made by the High Court.

                   8. Priority shall be given by the Fast Track Courts
               for disposal of those sessions cases which are pending
               for the longest period of time, and/or those involving
               undertrials. Similar shall be the approach for civil
               cases i.e. old cases shall be given priority.

                   9. …...

                   10…...

                   11…..

                   12 …..

                   13 …..



                    14. No right will be conferred on judicial officers
               in service for claiming any regular promotion on the
               basis of his/her appointment on ad-hoc basis under the
               Scheme. The service rendered in Fast Track Courts
               will be deemed as service rendered in the parent
               cadre. In case any judicial officer is promoted to
               higher grade in the parent cadre during his tenure in
               Fast Track Courts, the service rendered in Fast Track
               Courts will be deemed to be service in such higher
               grade.

                    15…..

                    16….

                    17….

 
18. The High Court and the State Government
               shall ensure that there exists no vacancy so far as the
               Fast Track Courts are concerned, and necessary steps
               in that regard shall be taken within three months from
               today. In other words, steps should be taken to set up
               all the Fast Track Courts within the stipulated time.”
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               13


 
2.4.     Thereafter in 
Malik Mazhar Sultan and another v. U.P. Public

     Service Commission
 and others7 the issues regarding timely declaration

     of vacancies in judicial service and timely appointments were considered

     by this Court as under:




                 “23. It is absolutely necessary to evolve a mechanism
                 to speedily determine and fill vacancies of judges at
                 all levels. For this purpose, timely steps are required
                 to be taken for determination of vacancies, issue of
                 advertisement, conducting examinations, interviews,
                 declaration of the final results and issue of orders of
                 appointments. For all these and other steps, if any, it is
                 necessary to provide for fixed time schedule so that
                 the system works automatically and there is no delay
                 in filling up of vacancies. The dates for taking these
                 steps can be provided for on the pattern similar to
                 filling of vacancies in some other services or filling of
                 seats for admission in medical colleges. The schedule
                 appended to the regulations governing medical
                 admissions sets out a time schedule for every step to
                 be strictly adhered to every year. The exception can be
                 provided for where sufficient number of vacancies do
                 not occur in a given year. 
The adherence to strict time
                 schedule can ensure timely filling of vacancies. All
                 the State Governments, the Union Territories and/or
                 the High Courts are directed to provide for time
                 schedule for the aforesaid purposes so that every year
                 vacancies that may occur are timely filled. All the
                 State Governments, the Union Territories and the
                 High Courts are directed to file within three months
                 details of the time schedule so fixed and date from
                 which the time schedule so fixed would be
                 operational.”


     2.5.     After the disposal of the appeals in 
Malik Mazhar Sultan and

     others v. U.P. Public Service Commission7
 suggestions were made by
      7   (2006) 9 SCC 507
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.


Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               14


     some of the State Governments and written submissions were also filed

     by the learned Amicus Curiae. In its order dated 04.01.2017 8, this Court

     issued further directions and prescribed timelines. From paragraph 7

     onwards directions were issued for filling up vacancies in various cadres

     including the cadre of District Judges.



 
2.6.      By order dated 20.04.2010 passed in 
All India Judges’

     Association v. Union of India
 and others9 directions issued earlier with

     regard to 25% quota for Limited Departmental Competitive Examination

     were modified by this court as under:




                 “6. Having regard to various strategies available, we
                 are of the considered view that suitable amendment is
                 to be made for this 25% quota of limited departmental
                 competitive examination. We are also of the view,
                 with the past experience, that it is desirable that 25%
                 quota be reduced to 10%. We feel so as the required
                 result, which was sought to be achieved by this
                 process could not be achieved, thus it calls for
                 modification.



                 7. Thus, we direct that henceforth only 10% of the
                 cadre strength of District Judges be filled up by
                 limited departmental competitive examination with
                 those candidates who have qualified service of five
                 years as Civil Judge (Senior Division). Every year
                 vacancies are to be ascertained and the process of
                 selection shall be taken care of by the High Courts. If
                 any of the post is not filled up under 10% quota, the
                 same shall be filled up by regular promotion. In some
                 of the High Courts, process of selection of these 25%

      8    (2008) 17 SCC 703.

 
9   (2010) 15 SCC 170
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               15


               quota by holding limited departmental competitive
               examination is in progress, such process can be
               continued and the unfilled seats, if meritorious
               candidates are available, should be filled up. But if for
               some reason the seats are not filled up, they may be
               filled up by regular promotion and apply the usual
               mode of promotion process. Thus we pass the
               following order.



               8. Hereinafter, there shall be 25% of seats for direct
               recruitment from the Bar, 65% of seats are to be filled
               up by regular promotion of Civil Judge (Senior
               Division) and 10% seats are to be filled up by limited
               departmental competitive examination. If candidates
               are not available for 10% seats, or are not able to
               qualify in the examination then vacant posts are to be
               filled up by regular promotion in accordance with the
               Service Rules applicable.



               9. All the High Courts are hereby directed to take
               steps to see that existing Service Rules be amended
               positively with effect from 1-1-2011. If the Rules are
               not suitably amended, this order shall prevail and
               further recruitment from 1-1-2011 shall be continued
               accordingly as directed by us. The time schedule
               prescribed in the order dated 4-1-2007 (in Malik
               Mazhar Sultan case8) shall be strictly adhered to for
               the purpose of selection. All the vacancies are to be
               filled up in that particular year and there shall not be
               any carry forward of the unfilled posts.”



 
3.     In the State of Rajasthan, the matters relating to Constitution of

     Courts and Jurisdiction of Courts were dealt with by the Rajasthan Civil

     Courts Ordinance, 1950 which consolidated and amended the law relating

     to Civil Courts in the State. Clause 6 of said Ordinance dealt with Classes

     of Courts; Clause 8 dealt with Power to fix number of District Judges
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               16


     while Clause 10 dealt with the appointment of Additional Judges. In

     exercise of powers conferred by 
Article 233
 and the Proviso to 
Article 309


     of the Constitution of India, the Governor of Rajasthan made the Rajasthan

     Higher Judicial Service Rules, 1969 (“1969 Rules”, for short) in

     consultation with the High Court10 in respect of the Rajasthan Higher

     Judicial Service for making appointments, postings and promotions to the

     cadre of District Judges, and to provide for other ancillary matters.



               The expressions ‘Direct Recruitment’, ‘District Judge’, ‘Member

     of the Service’ and ‘Service’ were defined in Rule 3 as under:-



                       “(c) “Direct recruitment” means recruitment in
                             the matter prescribed by clause (ii) of rule
                             8;



                            (d)“District Judge” includes Additional
                             District Judge, Sessions Judge and
                             Additional Sessions Judge;



                                             ………


                          (f) “Member of the Service” means a person
                              appointed in a substantive capacity to a
                              post in the service;

                                             ………

 
(h) “Service” means the Rajasthan Higher
                             Judicial Service”




     10   The High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               17


      3.1.   Part-II and Part-III of 1969 Rules dealt with topics ‘Cadre’ and

      ‘Principles and Procedure of Recruitment and Promotion’. Rules 6 to 9

      under said Parts-II and III were as under:-



               “6. Strength of the Service.-

                 (1) The strength of the Service shall, until orders
                 varying the same have been passed under sub-rule
                 (2), be as specified in Schedule I.

                 (2) The strength of the service may be varied by the
                 Governor, from time to time, in consultation with
                 the Court.



                 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule
                 (1) and (2), the Governor may, in consultation with
                 the Court, hold any appointment to the service in
                 abeyance for such time as he deems fit, without
                 thereby entitling any person to compensation.



               7. Principles and procedure to be followed.- For the
               purpose of recruitment to the service, the following
               principles and procedure of recruitment and
               promotion 
laid down by
 the Court shall be followed.



               8. Sources of Recruitment.- Recruitment to the
               service shall be made –


                 (i)      by promotion from amongst the members
                 of the Rajasthan Judicial Service; or


                 (ii)    by direct recruitment from the advocates
                 who have practiced in the Court or Courts
                 subordinate thereto for a period of not less than
                 seven years.



 
9. Appointment to the service.- (1) Subject to the
               provisions of these rules, appointment of persons to
               the service shall be made by the Governor on the
               recommendation of the Court made from time to time;
               provided that the number of persons appointed to the
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               18


               service by direct recruitment shall at no time exceed
               one third of the total strength of the service.



               (2) Subject to the provisions of sub-rule (1), after
               every three persons appointed by promotion, the
               fourth person shall, as far as possible, be appointed by
               direct recruitment. If a suitable person is not
               available for appointment by direct recruitment, the
               post may be filled by promotion from amongst the
               members of the Rajasthan Judicial Service.”


     3.2.   Rules 22 and 23 in Part-III dealt with ‘Temporary or officiating

     appointment’ and ‘Appointments to posts in the selection grade’ as under:-



               “22. Temporary or officiating appointment.- On the
               occurrence of temporary or permanent vacancies the
               Court shall recommend the Governor the names of the
               candidates from amongst the persons who are eligible
               for appointment to the service by promotion under
               clause (i) of rule 8, for temporary or officiating
               appointment.



               23. Appointments to posts in the selection Grade.-

               Appointments to the posts in the selection grade of the
               service shall be made by the Governor in consultation
               with the Court on the basis of merit.”


     3.3.   Part IV of 1969 Rules dealt with ‘Seniority’, ‘Probation’ and

     ‘Confirmation’. Rule 24 dealt with issue of Seniority was as under:-



               “24. Seniority.- Subject to the other provisions of
               these rules, seniority in the service shall be
               determined by the date of the order of substantive
               appointment in a permanent vacancy including
               appointment on probation under rule 25:



 
Provided that a promoted officer who may have been
               allowed to officiate continuously against a permanent
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                                19


               vacancy in the cadre from a date, prior to the date of
               appointment of a direct recruit, shall, if he is
               subsequently selected and substantively appointed in
               the service, take his seniority in the cadre over such
               direct recruit:



               Provided further that the seniority of candidates
               appointed to the service shall in the case of the
               appointment of more persons than one to the service
               by an order of the same date, follow the order in
               which their names have been recommended by the
               Court.”

            Schedule-I to 1969 Rules dealt with ‘Strength of Service’, which

     was stated to be 89 in the post of District & Sessions Judge and Additional

     District Sessions Judge, which over a period of time got raised to 150.



 
4.     However, appointments in excess of the strength indicated in

     Schedule I to 1969 Rules, were made on various occasions.                  By

     Notification dated 31.03.2001 issued under the provisions of the

     Ordinance and under Rule 6(2) of 1969 Rules, 40 Additional District and

     Sessions Courts were set up in the State for Fast Track disposal of cases

     pending before the District Judges. By Notification dated 12.07.2002, 13

     more Additional District and Sessions Courts were set up under the

     aforesaid provisions of the Ordinance and 1969 Rules for Fast Track

     disposal of cases pending before the District Courts.              Further, 30

     Additional District and Sessions Courts were again set up on 17.04.2003

     in pursuance of aforesaid powers for Fast Track disposal of cases pending
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               20


     before the District Judges.     Thus 83 Courts were created between

     31.03.2001 and 17.04.2003 which are commonly known as Fast Track

     Courts and officers from the cadre of Senior Civil Judges were promoted

     under Rule 22 of 1969 Rules to man these Fast Track Courts.



           It may be mentioned that though the decision of this Court in Brij

     Mohan Lal6 had indicated three sources from which the candidates could

     be appointed to man the Fast Track Courts, in the State of Rajasthan

     candidates were drawn only from one source namely through ad-



     hoc/officiating   promotions to the persons from the feeder cadre viz.



     Senior Civil Judges Cadre. There was no appointment of any retired

     Judge or by way of recruitment from the Bar.



 
5.     By Order dated 07.05.2003 issued in compliance of directions of

     this Court in 
All India Judges Association and others versus Union of

     India and Others1
 and in accordance with the recommendation of First

     National Judicial Pay Commission, 71 posts were acknowledged to be in

     “Selection Scale” while 29 posts were found to be in “Super Time Scale”

     in the Higher Judicial Service for the year 2002-2003.




 
6.     On 20.10.2003, a Notification was issued by the High Court

     notifying 19 vacansies for Direct Recruitment to the Higher Judicial
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               21


     Service. Out of these 19 vacancies, 11 were shown as current vacancies

     while 8 were shown as backlog vacancies. A challenge was raised in this

     Court by way of Writ Petition (Civil) No.576 of 2003 by the Association

     submitting inter alia that there were no vacancies for Direct Recruits and

     as such the Notification dated 20.10.2003 was invalid.         It was also

     submitted that as on the date, 220 officers were functioning in the cadre of

     District Judges and Additional District Judges.



     7.        On 13.12.2004, 22 Judicial Officers from the cadre of Senior Civil

     Judge were promoted as Additional District and Sessions Judges (Fast

     Track).



     8.        The matters concerning regular promotion to be granted to the

     level of District Judge including whether those who were promoted as

     Additional District and Sessions Judge (Fast Track) under Rule 22 of 1969

     Rules were being considered by the High Court. A report of a Committee

     constituted to consider said issues was submitted on 23.08.2008. The

     matter was then placed before the Full Court on 29.11.2008 and thereafter

     the matter stood deferred to 13.02.2009, 31.10.2009 and to 23.03.2010

     successively.

 
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               22


     9.        By order dated 11.01.2008, some Judicial Officers, including the

     petitioners in Writ Petition (Civil) No.464 of 2019, were promoted as

     Additional District and Sessions Judges on Ad-hoc basis to man the Fast

     Track Courts. The order stated as under:-



                 “On the recommendation of Rajasthan High Court,
                 H.E. the Governor of State of Rajasthan is pleased to
                 appoint/promote the following 37 officers in the cadre
                 of R.H.J.S. as Additional District and Sessioins
                 Judges on purely ad-hoc basis to man the temporary
                 Fast Track Courts”.



     9.1       A consequential order was thereafter passed on 11.03.2008

     directing transfer/posting of said Judicial Officers in the rank of

     Additional District and Sessions Judges (Fast Track).



     9.2       In terms of the decision of Full Court in its Meeting dated

     29.11.2008, the period of probation of 34 out of said 37 Judicial Officers

     appointed by Order dated 11.01.2008 was extended till further orders.



 
10.       On 07.07.2009, the challenge raised by the Association in Writ

     Petition (Civil) No.576 of 2003 was decided by this Court vide its decision

     in 
Rajasthan Judicial Service Officers’ Association v. State of Rajasthan

     and Another11
. It was observed by this Court that the sanctioned strength

     in terms of 1969 Rules was only 150 and as against 25% posts which could

     11   (2009) 14 SCC 656
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.


Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               23


     be filled up by Direct Recruitment, 41 Direct Recruits were already

     working in the Higher Judicial Service. It was, therefore, concluded that

     there was no substantive vacancy available for Direct Recruits.        The

     petition was allowed and the Notification dated 20.10.2003 was set aside.



     The relevant observations of this Court were as under:-



               “8. According to the petitioner, the total cadre
               strength of RHJS is 150 and there are already 41
               direct recruits working in RHJS. Since the total cadre
               strength is 150 and since 25% of the posts were
               directed by the High Court to be filled in by direct
               recruitment, there were no vacant posts available for
               direct recruits since 25% of 150 is 37, while 41 direct
               recruits were already working in RHJS. The petitioner
               also submitted that if 19 vacancies should be treated
               as 25% of the direct recruitment then there must be at
               least 57 fresh appointments in RHJS by promotion,
               but that has not been done.

                                    … … …


               11. In our opinion, as held by us in Veena Verma case,
               the cadre strength is only 150 and not 240 because the
               strength of the service is as per Rule 6(2) of the
               Rajasthan Higher Judicial Service Rules as mentioned
               in Schedule I to the Rules. Until and unless the
               Schedule is amended in accordance with Rule 6(2) the
               strength of the service cannot be varied, as held by us
               in Veena Verma case12. As yet, we are told, no order
               has been passed under Rule 6(2).



               12. We have also perused the counter-affidavit filed
               by the State of Rajasthan and also the rejoinder-

 
affidavit filed in the case. It is stated in Para 3 of the
               rejoinder-affidavit that the impugned notification is in
               violation of the stay order dated 28-9-2000 in Special
               Leave Petition No. 9346 of 1999, staying the
               operation of the order dated 30-4-1999 in DB (C) Spl.
               Application No. 410 of 1998. It is stated in Para 6 of
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               24


                 the rejoinder-affidavit that there are as on date 220
                 officers functioning in the cadre of District Judges
                 and Additional District Judges and as such there are
                 no existing vacancies.



                 13. In our opinion, this writ petition has to be allowed.
                 In view of our decision in Veena Verma case12 it has
                 to be held that under the existing Rule the strength of
                 the service of RHJS is 150 and since there are 41
                 direct recruits already working, there is no substantive
                 vacancy. Hence the impugned notification is illegal
                 and deserves to be quashed. The writ petition is
                 allowed and the impugned notification is quashed.
                 However, we make it clear that it is open to the State
                 Government in consultation with the High Court to
                 amend Schedule I to the Rules in accordance with
                 Rule 6(2) and thereby vary the strength of the service.



                 14. The petitioner has filed this writ petition seeking a
                 direction to the respondents to complete the selection
                 process initiated under Notification No. Estt.
                 (RJS)/118/2003 dated 20-10-2003. As we have
                 quashed the said notification in WP (C) No. 576 of
                 2003, this writ petition [WP (C) No. 275 of 2007] is
                 dismissed as having become infructuous.”



 
11.       On the same day, a decision was rendered by this Court in High

     Court of 
Judicature For Rajasthan v. Veena Verma and another
 12, which

     inter alia considered whether Notification dated 21.12.1996 inviting

     applications for 11 posts in the Higher Judicial Service in the State of

     Rajasthan by Direct Recruitment was valid. It was observed that 11 posts

     were not available for Direct Recruitment. While dealing with the

     challenge, it was observed,
     12   (2009) 14 SCC 734
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.


Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               25


               “33. It may be mentioned that posts can be created
               dehors the cadre of a service, and these are known as
               ex cadre posts. The posts created without a specific
               order under Rule 6(2) are ex cadre posts. Hence in our
               opinion the temporary or permanent vacancies or
               posts created beyond the number of posts in Schedule
               I without a specific order under Rule 6(2) varying
               Schedule I to the Rules are only ex cadre posts, and
               can only be filled in by promotees, and not by direct
               recruitment.



               34. It may be noted that Rule 9(2) uses the words “as
               far as possible”. In our opinion, this means that there
               is no hard-and-fast rule that after every three persons
               appointed by promotion, the fourth person has to be
               appointed by direct recruitment. In our opinion, the
               Division Bench of the High Court has given a wrong
               interpretation of Rule 9(2) of the Rules by observing:



                   “it does not give a licence to the
                   respondents to refuse to appoint every
                   fourth person by direct recruitment on the
                   ground that it was not possible for any other
                   reason than the maintenance of the limit of
                   one-third of the total strength imposed by
                   sub-rule (1) of Rule 9 on direct
                   recruitment”.



               In our opinion this is a wrong view taken by the
               Division Bench of the High Court as is evident from
               the words “as far as possible” in Rule 9(2). These
               words give a discretion to the authorities, and the
               Court cannot interfere with this discretion, unless it is
               palpably arbitrary.

                                                 [Emphasis supplied]


 
35. In our opinion, the Division Bench of the High
               Court erred in law in holding that for the purpose of
               direct recruitment the temporary or permanent posts
               created outside the cadre without amending Schedule
               I were also to be included while calculating the
               strength of the Service. The Division Bench also erred
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               26


               in holding that whenever posts are created, the
               strength of the Service is deemed to have been
               automatically increased although there is no order
               under Rule 6(2) in this connection amending Schedule
               I. In our opinion, there has to be a specific order under
               Rule 6(2) amending Schedule I otherwise it cannot be
               said that the strength of the cadre has been increased.
               Hence, in our opinion, the temporary or permanent
               posts created outside the cadre cannot be taken into
               consideration for determining the strength of the
               cadre.”


     12.    On 18.01.2010, in exercise of the powers conferred by 
Articles 233


     and 
234
 read with proviso to 
Article 309
 of the Constitution of India, the

     Governor of Rajasthan in consultation with the Rajasthan Public Service

     Commission and the High Court made Rules for regulating recruitment to

     the posts in, and the conditions and other matters related to the service of

     persons appointed to the Rajasthan Judicial Service. The Rules are called

     Rajasthan Judicial Service Rules, 2010 (“2010 Rules”, for short).



     12.1   The terms, “Cadre”, “Cadre Post”, “Member of the Service” and

     “Substantive appointment” are defined in clauses (b), (c), (g) and (l) of

     Rule 3 as under:



               “Rule 3: Definitions


               (b) “Cadre” means the cadre of District Judge, Senior
               Civil Judge and Civil Judge as provided under Rule 5
               of Part-II of these Rules;



               (c) “Cadre Post” means any post specified in
               Schedule-I;

 
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               27


                 (g) “Member of the Service” means a person
                 appointed substantively to a post in the service under
                 the provisions of these Rules; and


                 (l) “Substantive appointment” means an appointment
                 made under the provisions of these rules to a
                 substantive vacancy after due selection by any of the
                 methods of recruitment prescribed under these Rules
                 and includes an appointment on probation followed
                 by confirmation on completion of the probation
                 period.”


     12.2      Part-II of 2010 Rules deals with “Cadre” and Rule 5 stipulates

     that on and from the date of commencement of the Rules, the Rajasthan

     Judicial Service shall stand re-constituted and re-designated into

     following three cadres:



               (A)   District Judges

               (B)   Senior Civil Judge, and

               (C)   Civil Judge.



               Rule 6 deals with “Strength of the Service” and is to the following
     effect.



                 “(1) The Strength of the Service in each cadre and
                 number of other posts shall be determined by the
                 Government from time to time, in consultation with
                 the Court and the existing posts in each cadre in the
                 service shall be as specified in Schedule-I.
                 (2) The strength of other posts manned by the
                 members of the service shall be as specified in
                 Schedule-II unless any order varying the same is
                 issued under sub-rule(1):

 
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               28


                   Provided that the State Government may, in
               consultation with the Court, create any permanent or
               temporary post from time to time as may be
               considered necessary and may abolish any such post
               or posts in the like manner without thereby conferring
               any right on any person for any type of claim.”


     12.3.   Part-III of 2010 Rules deals with subject “General Conditions”

     and Rules 7, 8 and 15 are as under :-



               “7. Determination of vacancies: (1) subject to the
               provisions of these rules, the Court shall determine
               and notify the actual number of existing and expected
               vacancies in each cadre as per the time schedule
               specified in Schedule-III.



               (2) Where the vacancies in the cadre are to be filled in
               by a single method, the vacancies so determined shall
               be filled by that method.



               (3) Where the vacancies in the cadre are to be filled in
               by more than one method, the apportionment of
               vacancies determined under sub-rule (1), to each such
               method shall be done maintaining the prescribed
               percentage for the particular method taking into
               account consideration the overall number of posts
               already filled in:



               Provided that the apportionment for filling up
               vacancies in the cadre of District Judge, shall be made
               in a cyclic order of respective quota of each category,
               i.e. Promotee on the basis of merit-cum-seniority,
               Promotee on the basis of Limited Competitive
               Examination and the Direct Recruitee.



               8. Examination:- For filling up of vacancies in the
               cadre of District Judge and Civil Judge, examination
               shall be conducted by the Recruiting Authority as per
               the time Schedule specified in Schedule III.

 
………
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               29


               15. Temporary or officiating appointments:- On
               occurrence of temporary or permanent vacancy, in the
               cadre of District Judge or the Senior Civil Judge, as
               the case may be, not taken into consideration at the
               time of determining the vacancies under Rule 7 and if
               in the opinion of the Court such vacancy is to be filled
               in immediately, the Court shall recommend to the
               Appointing Authority the names of the persons
               eligible for appointment maximum for a period of one
               year and such appointment shall not confer any rights
               upon the person so appointed.”


     12.4.   Part IV deals with “Methods of Recruitment” under which

     “Recruitment to the cadre of Civil Judge” and “Recruitment to the cadre

     of Senior Civil Judge” are dealt with in Rules 16 to 30 of sub-Parts A and

     B, while “Recruitment to the cadre of District Judge” is dealt with under

     sub-Part C. Rule 31 deals with source of recruitment, as under:-



               “31. Source of recruitment: (1) Fifty percent posts in
               the cadre of District Judge shall be filled in by
               promotion from amongst Senior Civil Judges on the
               basis of merit-cum-seniority subject to passing of
               suitability test as provided under Schedule-IV.



               (2) Twenty five percent posts in the cadre of District
               Judge shall be filled in by promotion from Senior
               Civil Judges strictly on the basis of merit through
               limited competitive examination conducted by the
               Court.



               (3) Twenty Five percent posts in the cadre of District
               Judge shall be filled in by direct recruitment from
               amongst the eligible Advocates on the basis of written
               examination and interview conducted by the Court.



 
(4) For the purpose of proper maintenance and
               determination of seniority of persons appointed
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               30


               through the aforesaid sources, a roster for filling of
               vacancies based on quota of vacancies reserved here-
               in-above, as given in Schedule-VII shall be
               maintained. This roster shall operate prospectively.”


      12.5. Thereafter the relevant subjects are dealt with under three sub-



      heads named as (I) Promotion, (II) Direct Recruitment and (III)

      Appointment. Rule 32 dealing with the “Recruitment by Promotion” is

      as under:



               “32. Recruitment by promotion:- (1) Fifty percent
               posts in the Cadre of District Judge shall be filled in
               by promotion from amongst Senior Civil Judges
               recommended by the Court, on the basis of merit-
               cum-seniority, subject to passing of suitability test as
               provided in Schedule-VI.



               Explanation: “Qualifying the eligibility test shall not
               affect the inter-se-seniority of the officers in the Cadre
               of Senior Civil Judge.



               (2) The recruitment in the cadre of District Judges
               under sub-rule (2) of rule 31 shall be made by a
               Limited Competitive Examination conducted by the
               Court in accordance with the scheme of the
               examination prescribed under Schedule-VIII.



               (3) A Senior Civil Judge who has completed actual
               five years service as on the first day of January
               preceding the last date fixed for the receipt of the
               applications shall be eligible for appearing in the
               Limited Competitive Examination for promotion to
               the Cadre of District Judge.



 
(4) For the purpose of Limited Competitive
               Examination, applications shall be invited by the
               Court from all eligible Senior Civil Judges in such
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               31


               manner and in such form as may be specified by the
               Court.



               (5) Candidates who have obtained minimum 50%
               marks in the Limited Competitive Examination shall
               be eligible for interview by a Committee consisting of
               Chief Justice, Administrative Judge and two other
               Judges nominated by the Chief Justice.            The
               Committee taking into consideration the performance
               at examination, the service record and the
               performance at the interview shall assess the
               suitability and recommend the names of the offices
               for promotion.”


     12.6    Part-D deals with “Probation”, “Confirmation” and “Seniority”.



     Sub-heading dealing with “Appointment” deals with issue of combined

     Select List as under:



               “42. Combined Select List: The Court shall prepare a
               combined select list putting the names of candidates
               in cyclic as provided in Schedule-VII from the lit
               prepared under sub-rule (1) and (5) of Rules 32 and
               41 and send it to the Appointing Authority.”

     12.7   The issue of seniority is dealt with by Rule 47 as under:

               “47. Seniority: Subject to the other provisions of
               these Rules:

               (1) Seniority in the service in the cadre of Civil Judge
                   shall be determined from the date of the order of
                   substantive appointment to the service:



                  Provided that the seniority of candidates appointed
                  to the service shall, in the case of appointment of
                  more persons than one follow the order in which
                  they have been placed in the list prepared by the
                  Recruiting Authority under Rule 24 of these Rules.



 
(2) Inter-se seniority of persons promoted to the
                  Senior Civil Judge cadre in the same year shall be
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               32


                  the same as it was in the post held by them at the
                  time of promotion.



               (3) Seniority of persons appointed to the Service
                    in the District Judge cadre by direct recruitment
                   shall be determined from the date of the order of
                   substantive appointment in the cadre.



                   Provided that the seniority of direct recruitee to
                   the cadre, in the case of appointment of more
                   persons than one by an order of the same
                   selection, shall follow the order in which they
                   have been placed in the list prepared by the Court
                   under rule 41.



               (4) Inter-se seniority of persons promoted to the
                  District Judge cadre in the same year shall be the
                  same as it was in the post held by them at the time
                  of promotion.



               (5) The seniority of direct recruitee vis-a-vis the
                  promote appointed to the cadre of District Judge
                  shall be determined in the order of their names
                  placed in the combined select list prepared under
                  Rule 42:



                     Provided that the persons promoted under Rule
                  15 shall not be given seniority over the direct
                  recruitee.”


     12.8    Rule 57 repealed 1969 Rules and made provisions for saving

     certain actions as under:



               “57. Repeal and savings: The Rajasthan Highter
               Judicial Service Rules, 1969 and the Rajasthan
               Judicial Service Rules, 1955, as amended from time
               to time, are hereby repealed:



 
Provided that such repeal shall not affect any
               order made, action taken, effects and consequences of
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               33


               anything done or suffered there under or any right,
               privilege, obligation or liability already acquired,
               accrued or incurred there under, or enquiry,
               verification, or proceedings in respect thereof made.”


     12.9    Schedule I which is referable to Rule 3(c) and Rule 6(1) of the

     Rules deals with topic “Cadre Strength of the Service” and Part A deals

     with “District Judge Cadre” which enumerates various designations in

     said cadre aggregating to 223 and earmarks 10% reserve for leave,

     training, deputation etc.; thus taking the grand total to 245. Parts B and

     C of this Schedule deal with “Senior Civil Judge Cadre” and “Civil

     Judge Cadre” and set out the strength at 222 and 329 respectively.



     12.10 Schedule II which is referable to Rule 6(2) of 2010 Rules deals

     with topic “Strength of the Service”. Part-A thereof enumerates various

     designations and the appropriate strength for the concerned posts in

     “District Judge Cadre”, in which 102 posts are mentioned including 83

     “Additional District Judges (Fast Tracks)”. In the same Schedule, Parts

     B and C deal with “Senior Civil Judge Cadre” and “Civil Judge Cadre”

     respectively and the strength noted against said two parts is 7 and 4

     respectively.

 
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                                        34


     12.11 Schedule VII which is referable to Rule 31(4) sets out the Roster

     for “filling up vacancies in the District Judge Cadre by direct recruitment

     and by promotion.” First four points in the Roster are as under:



              1.      By promotion-merit-cum-seniority

              2.      By promotion-merit-cum-seniority

              3.      By promotion-Limited Competitive Examination

              4.      By direct recruitment.

              Said pattern is then followed in succession13.



     13.      On 31.03.2010 a Notification was issued by the High Court

     notifying 58 vacancies to be filled in the cadre of District Judge. Out of 58

     vacancies so notified, 36 vacancies were to be filled by the Direct

     Recruitment from the Bar while remaining 22 vacancies were to be filled

     by promotion through LCE as provided in Rules 7, 8, 32(1) and 40(1)

     along with Schedule-II to 2010 Rules. In this recruitment, no provision

     was made for 50% promotion quota meant for Promotees. Thereafter, a

     Notification was issued on 15.04.2010 inviting applications from Senior

     Civil Judges who had completed five years of actual service for being

     considered for 22 posts in the cadre of the District Judge to be filled by

     LCE and for filling up 36 vacancies through Direct Recruitment.



13 The pattern was thereafter modified vide Notification dated 31.08.2012 although the ratio
between three sources was kept intact.

 
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               35


     14.       
In 
Malik Mazhar Sultan and others v. U.P. Public Service

     Commission7
, an affidavit was filed on behalf of the High Court in I.A.

     No. 73 of 2009. The stand taken by the High Court in said affidavit was as

     under:-




 
“2. It is submitted that in compliance of the
                directions of Hon’ble Court dated 21.03.2002 passed
                in 
All India Judges Association Vs. UOI & Ors.
 (AIR
                2002 SC 1752 +2002 (4) SCC 247), new Rules for
                State Judicial Service, namely “Rajasthan State
                Judicial Service Rules 2003” (hereinafter referred to
                as draft Rules of 2003) were being framed, wherein
                provision of various modes of Recruitment/Promotion
                as approved and directed by this Hon’ble Court had
                been incorporated.




                3. In the draft Rules, 2003 a time bound schedule for
                recruitment of the Judicial Officers was also provided,
                which was more or less on the same lines as directed
                by the Hon’ble Court in this matter. However, there
                was variation between dates specified in the calendar
                provided in Schedule-III of the draft Rules of 2003
                and time schedule prescribed by the Hon’ble Court.

                As such, the time schedule prescribed by the Hon’ble
                Court could be implemented only after amending the
                Draft Rules, 2003 and due promulgation of the same.
                Amendment in the Draft Rules of 2003 would have
                further required, approval of the Full Court of the
                High Court and consultation with the Rajasthan
                Public Service Commission resulting in further delay
                in due promulgation of the Draft Rules of 2003.
                Therefore, an application dated 11.07.2008 for
                direction and modification was preferred by the
                Rajasthan High Court before the Hon’ble Court and it
                was prayed that the Hon’ble Court may be pleased:-

 
(a) to allow the application and permit the
                applicant/Rajasthan High Court to follow the calendar
                as annexed in Schedule-III of the draft of Rules, 2003
                after due promulgation thereof; and
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               36


               (b) to grant exemption to the applicant from
               implementing the time Schedule as prescribed by the
               Hon’ble Court vide it’s order dated 04.01.2007 till
               draft Rules 2003 are finalized and duly promulgated.

               This application for directions and modification was
               registered as I.A. No.39. Copy of the same is annexed
               herewith and marked as Annexure-R1.



               4. It is submitted that while I.A. No.39 preferred by
               the Rajasthan High Court was pending consideration,
               in pursuance of order dated 24.07.2008 passed by this
               Hon’ble Court, a factual report on behalf of Rajasthan
               High Court with regard to filling of vacancies in
               subordinate judiciary in the format prescribed by the
               Hon’ble Court was filed by the answering respondent
               through an affidavit dated 27.08.2008. True copy of
               the same is annexed herewith and marked as
               ANNEXURE-R-2.



               5. It is submitted that while considering the factual
               report with regard to filling of vacancies in
               subordinate judiciary filed by the Rajasthan High
               Court through the affidavit dated 27.08.2008
               (Annexure-R-2), the Hon’ble Court vide its order
               dated 23.09.2008 (Annexure-A-1) dismissed the I.A.
               No.39 preferred by the Rajasthan High Court.



               6. It is submitted that meanwhile the Draft Rules
               2003, incorporating the time schedule prescribed by
               the Hon’ble Court and other necessary amendments
               were renamed as “Rajasthan Judicial Service Rules,
               2010” (hereinafter to be referred as Rules, 2010) and
               the same have been duly promulgated and come into
               force w.e.f. the date of its publication in Rajasthan
               Gazette i.e.19.01.2010.



               7. It is submitted that: on the date of submission of
               the IA i.e. 10.10.2009, there were 75 vacancies in the
               cadre of Rajasthan Higher Judicial Service and 33
               vacancies in the cadre of Civil Judge (Sr. Division).



 
8. It is submitted that a report dated 23.08.2008 of a
               Committee of Hon’ble Judges, constituted by the
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               37


               Hon’ble Chief Justice to consider the matter regarding
               promotions in the cadre of District Judge on the post
               of Additional District & Sessions Judge (regular),
               Additional District & Sessions Judge (Fast Track) and
               from the post of Civil Judge (Jr. Division) to the post
               of Civil Judge (Sr. Division), recommending
               promotions in these cadres was placed before the
               Hon’ble Full Court in its meeting held on 29.11.2008,
               13.02.2009 and 31.10.2009 but due to difference of
               opinion, the report of the Hon’ble Committee could
               not be approved by the Full Court. However, Hon’ble
               Full Court in its meeting held on 31.10.2009 approved
               the report of the Hon’ble Committee dated 23.08.2008
               to the extent of making promotion of 33 officers from
               the post of Civil Judge (Jr. Division) to the post of
               Civil Judge (Sr. Division). Consequently, 33 officers
               have been promoted from the post of Civil Judge (Jr.
               Division) to that of Civil Judge (Sr. Division) vide
               order dated 30.11.2009.        Copy of order dated
               30.11.2009 is annexed herewith and marked as
               ANNEXURE-R/3.



 
9. It is submitted that the report dated 23.08.2008 of
               the Hon’ble Committee regarding grant of promotions
               to the post of Additional District & Sessions Judge
               (regular) and Additional District & Sessions Judge
               (Fast Track) was again placed for consideration before
               the Hon’ble Full Court in its meeting held on
               20.03.2010. Whereupon it was Resolved that the
               report requires reconsideration by the Promotion
               Committee after considering the service record for
               subsequent period also and the report of the
               Promotion Committee be placed before the Hon’ble
               Full Court by circulation. Pursuant to the Full
               Court Resolution, Hon’ble Committee convened its
               meeting on 05-06.04.2010 and submitted its report,
               suggesting amendment in Rule 15 of the Rajasthan
               Judicial Service Rules, 2010. This report of the
               Hon’ble Committee was placed before the Hon’ble
               Full Court in its meeting held on 10.04.2010
               whereupon it was Resolved to defer the matter
               regarding amendment in Rule 15 of Rajasthan Judicial
               Service Rules, 2010 and also Resolved to again
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               38


               request the Committee to reconsider the matter
               regarding promotion as per Full Court Resolution
               dated 20.03.2010. It is submitted that pursuant to the
               aforesaid Resolution the meeting of Hon’ble
               Committee has been fixed on 12.04.2010 and
               13.04.2010.



 
10. It is submitted that after the judgment dated
               07.07.2009 rendered by the Hon’ble Supreme Court
               in Civil Appeal No.5699/2000 High Court of
               Judicature for 
Rajasthan vs. Veena Verma & Ors.

               and the judgment of the same date rendered by the
               Hon’ble Court in Writ Petition Civil No.576/2003
               RJS Officers Asson.
 Vs. State of Rajasthan & Ors.
               the matter of determination of vacancies for direct
               recruitment in Rajasthan Higher Judicial Service was
               placed before the Hon’ble Full Court vide Circulation
               Case No.10/2009 on 18.07.2009 and on account of
               different opinion of Hon’ble Judges, on 16.09.2009
               the Hon’ble Chief Justice directed to put up the file
               later. In the meanwhile, Rajasthan Judicial Service
               Rules, 2010 came into force w.e.f. 19.01.2010.
               Therefore, the matter regarding consideration of
               vacancies in each cadre under the Rules of 2010 was
               considered by the Hon’ble Full Court in its meeting
               held on 24.01.2010 and the same was resolved to be
               deferred. The matter was again placed before the
               Hon’ble Full Court in its meeting held on 20.03.2010
               and as per Rajasthan Judicial Service Rules, 2010, the
               category wise vacancy in the District Judge Cadre
               upto 31.03.2011 has been resolved to be determined
               as under –

                    (a) By promoting                         - 49

                    (b) By limited competitive examination - 22

                    (c) By direct recruitment                - 36
                                    … … …”


 
15.    The matter in respect of consideration of the Report of the

     Committee with respect to promotion of Additional District and Sessions

     Judges, including those who were manning Fast Track Courts, was taken
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               39


     up by the Full Court on 23.03.2010. In March-April 2010, the Report of

     the Committee and records of the services rendered by all the concerned

     candidates were considered by the High Court and substantive absorption

     of those who were promoted to Fast Track Court and promotion of some

     candidates to the cadre of District Judge on substantive basis was approved

     by the Full Court.



     16. On 21.04.2010 a formal Order was issued by the State Government in

     view of the recommendation made by the High Court in its Resolution

     dated 12/13.04.2010 promoting 47 Judicial Officers who were manning

     Fast Track Courts to the level of Additional District Judges in accordance

     with the recommendation made by the Committee in its Report dated

     23.08.2008 (“the 47 Judicial Officers”, for short). It must be noted that the

     47 Judicial Officers were not intimated by the High Court that they could

     appear at LCE to be conducted in pursuance of the Notification dated

     15.04.2010. The Order recited as under:-



 
“On the recommendation of Rajasthan High Court,
               H.E. the Government of State of Rajasthan is pleased
               to appoint/promote the following 47 officers as
               Additional District and Sessions Judges in the District
               Judge Cadre.”

            On the same day i.e. on 21.04.2010 another Order was issued

     promoting 49 Senior Civil Judges, including the petitioner in Writ Petition
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               40


     (Civil) No.1008 of 2019, as Additional District and Sessions Judges on ad-



     hoc basis to man the Fast Track Courts.



     17.     The candidates who had applied in pursuance of the Notification

     dated 15.04.2010 appeared at the written examination held on 30.06.2010

     and the successful candidates were then called for interview. However, by

     communication dated 04.09.2010 interviews were postponed sine die.



     Later, by Notification dated 22.09.2010 which was issued in pursuance of

     the Resolution of the Full Court, the entire examination process for

     recruitment by Direct Recruitment and through LCE was directed to be

     held afresh.



     18.     A Notification was issued on 31.03.2011 renotifying the number of

     vacancies available for Direct Recruitment and for promotion through

     LCE. Said Notification was as under:-



                    “RAJASTHAN HIGH COURT JODHPUR

                                 NOTIFICATION

               As per the determination of vacancies for the current
               year & the strength of District Judge cadre being 245,
               the vacancies in the District Judge cadre as hereby
               notified as under:-



               Vacancies for Direct Recruitment          - 37
               Vacancies for promotion by Limited
               Competitive Examination                   - 22
               Vacancies for promotion                   - 24

 
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               41


                  In case the cadre strength is revised     to 255, the
                  vacancies would be as under:-

                  Vacancies for Direct Recruitment          -   39
                  Vacancies for promotion by Limited
                  Competitive Examination                    - 22
                  Vacancies for promotion                   - 33”


     18.1.      On the same day i.e. on 31.03.2011 two Orders were passed by the

     High Court; one abolishing 40 Fast Track Courts while the other directed

     continuation of the others “on ad-hoc basis as against the available vacant

     posts” till the matter was considered for regular promotion. The Order

     stated:-



                  “Consequent upon abolition of 40 ADJ (FT) Courts
                  vide      Government       Notification     No.F.10(4)
                  Nyay/98/Part dt. 31.3.2011, the following officers
                  shown at SI. No.01 to 39 working as ADJ (FT) are
                  continued on ad hoc basis as against the available
                  vacant posts till the matter is considered for regular
                  promotion in accordance with Rules and are
                  transferred/ posted as mentioned below. The officers
                  shown at S.No.40 to 53 are also transferred / posted as
                  mentioned below:-….”



 
19.        A Bench of three Judges of this Court after noting its earlier

     Judgment in 
All India Judges’ Association vs. Union of India and

     Others1
 modified certain directions contained therein by its Order dated

     20.04.20109. The relevant paragraphs have already been quoated in

     paragraph 2.6 hereinabove.


 
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               42


     20.       On 10.06.2011, appropriate amendments were effected in 2010

     Rules to fix the quota for Promotees at 65% in accordance with the

     aforesaid Order dated 20.04.20109 issued by this Court and raising the

     cadre strength of District Judges from 245 to 255.



     21.       
In 
Brij Mohan Lal v. Union of India and Others
 14, this Court inter

     alia dealt with two Transferred Cases, one arising from Writ Petition filed

     in the High Court of Punjab and Haryana seeking directions to stop the

     scheme and policy of appointment of retired District and Sessions Judges

     as Ad-hoc Judges of the Fast Track Courts and the other filed in the High

     Court of Andhra Pradesh seeking declaration that constitution of Fast

     Track Courts was unconstitutional and consequently be set aside. This

     Court considered the entire scheme as well as the relevant provisions in

     various States and considered diverse submissions. One of the questions

     raised by this Court was:-




 
“Whether any of the appointees to the post of ad
                 hoc Judges under the FTC Scheme have a right to the
                 post in the context of the facts of the present case?”

     21.1     Thereafter, the letters of appointment issued to various appointees

     including those from the State of Rajasthan were considered and while




     14   (2012) 6 SCC 502
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               43


     dealing with the issue of regularization of service rendered by the Judicial

     Officers’ manning Fast Track Courts, it was observed:-



                     “172. The prayer for regularisation of service and
                 absorption of the petitioner appointees against the
                 vacancies appearing in the regular cadre has been
                 made not only in cases involving the case of the State
                 of Orissa, but even in other States. Absorption in
                 service is not a right. Regularisation also is not a
                 statutory or a legal right enforceable by the persons
                 appointed under different rules to different posts.
                 Regularisation shall depend upon the facts and
                 circumstances of a given case as well as the relevant
                 rules applicable to such class of persons.”

      21.2 In so far as the State of Rajasthan is concerned, it was observed:-



                     “177. In the case of State of Rajasthan, it is the
                 judicial officers from the cadre of Civil Judge, Senior
                 Division, who were promoted as FTC Judges. They
                 have continued to hold those posts for a considerable
                 period. According to these petitioners, they were
                 promoted to the Higher Judicial Services as per the
                 Rules and, therefore, keeping in view the order of this
                 Court in Madhumita Das15 as well as the very essence
                 of the FTC Scheme, they should be absorbed as
                 members of the regular cadre of Higher Judicial
                 Services of the State of Rajasthan. The State
                 Government had issued a directive that they should
                 undertake the limited competitive examination for
                 their regular promotion/absorption in the higher cadre.
                 These officers questioned the correctness of this
                 directive on the ground that they were promoted as
                 Additional Sessions Judges (FTC) under the Rules
                 and, therefore, there was no question of any further
                 requirement for them to take any written examination
                 after the long years of service that they have already
                 put in in the Higher Judicial Services.



 
15   (2008) 6 SCC 731
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               44


                   178. The Rajasthan Judicial Service Rules, 2010
               are in force for appointment to the Higher Judicial
               Services of the State. The judgment of this Court in
               All India Judges’ Assn. (3) case 1 as well as the
               relevant Rules contemplate that a person who is to be
               directly appointed to the Higher Judicial Services has
               to undergo a written examination and appear in an
               interview before he can be appointed to the said
               cadre. As far as appointment by promotion is
               concerned, the promotion can be made by two
               different modes i.e. on the basis of seniority-cum-

               merit or through out-of-turn promotion wherein any
               Civil Judge, Senior Division who has put in five years
               of service is required to take a competitive
               examination and then to the extent of 25% of the
               vacancies available, such Judges would be promoted
               to the Higher Judicial Services.



                   179. It was admitted before us by the learned
               counsel appearing for the petitioners that these
               officers who were promoted as ad hoc FTC Judges
               had not taken any written competitive examination
               before their promotion to this post under the Higher
               Judicial Services. In other words, they were promoted
               on ad hoc basis depending on the availability of
               vacancy in FTCs. Once the Rules required a particular
               procedure to be adopted for promotion to the regular
               posts of the Higher Judicial Services, then the
               competent authority can effect the promotion only by
               that process and none other. In view of the admitted
               fact that these officers have not taken any written
               examination, we see no reason as to how the
               challenge made by these judicial officers to the
               directive issued by the State Government for
               undertaking of written examination may be sustained.
               Thus, the relief prayed for cannot be granted in its
               entirety.”

     21.3   Finally, following directions were issued in paragraph 207:-



 
“207. Without any intent to interfere with the
               policy decision taken by the Governments, but
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               45


               unmistakably, to protect the guarantees of 
Article 21

               of the Constitution, to improve the justice delivery
               system and fortify the independence of judiciary,
               while ensuring attainment of constitutional goals as
               well as to do complete justice to the lis before us, in
               terms of 
Article 142
 of the Constitution, we pass the
               following orders and directions:



                  207.1. Being a policy decision which has already
               taken effect, we decline to strike down the policy
               decision of the Union of India vide Letter dated 14-9-

               2010 not to finance the FTC Scheme beyond 31-3-
               2011.



                  207.2. All the States which have taken a policy
               decision to continue the FTC Scheme beyond 31-3-
               2011 shall adhere to the respective dates as
               announced, for example in the cases of States of
               Orissa (March 2013), Haryana (March 2016), Andhra
               Pradesh (March 2012) and Rajasthan (February
               2013).



                   207.3. The States which are in the process of
               taking a policy decision on whether or not to continue
               the FTC Scheme as a permanent feature of
               administration of justice in the respective States are
               free to take such a decision.



                   207.4. It is directed that all the States, henceforth,
               shall not take a decision to continue the FTC Scheme
               on ad hoc and temporary basis. The States are at
               liberty to decide but only with regard either to bring
               the FTC Scheme to an end or to continue the same as
               a permanent feature in the State.



                   207.5. The Union of India and the State
               Governments shall reallocate and utilise the funds
               apportioned by the 13th Finance Commission and/or
               make provisions for such additional funds to ensure
               regularisation of the FTC Judges in the manner
               indicated and/or for creation of additional courts as
               directed in this judgment.

 
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               46


                   207.6.   All     the    decisions      taken    and
               recommendations made at the Chief Justices and
               Chief Ministers’ Conference shall be placed before
               the Cabinet of the Centre or the State, as the case may
               be, which alone shall have the authority to finally
               accept, modify or decline the implementation of such
               decisions and, that too, upon objective consideration
               and for valid reasons. Let the minutes of the
               Conference of 2009, at least now, be placed before the
               Cabinet within three months from the date of
               pronouncement of this judgment for its information
               and appropriate action.



                  207.7. No decision, recommendation or proposal
               made by the Chief Justices and Chief Ministers’
               Conference shall be rejected or declined or varied at
               any bureaucratic level, in the hierarchy of the
               Governments, whether in the State or the Centre.



                   207.8. We hereby direct that it shall be for the
               Central Government to provide funds for carrying out
               the directions contained in this judgment and, if
               necessary, by reallocation of funds already allocated
               under the 13th Finance Commission for judiciary. We
               further direct that for creation of additional 10% posts
               of the existing cadre, the burden shall be equally
               shared by the Centre and the State Governments and
               funds be provided without any undue delay so that the
               courts can be established as per the schedule directed
               in this judgment.



                   207.9. All the persons who have been appointed
               by way of direct recruitment from the Bar as Judges
               to preside over FTCs under the FTC Scheme shall be
               entitled to be appointed to the regular cadre of the
               Higher Judicial Services of the respective States only
               in the following manner:



 
(a) The direct recruits to FTCs who opt for
                   regularisation shall take a written examination to
                   be conducted by the High Courts of the
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               47


                   respective States for determining their suitability
                   for absorption in the regular cadre of Additional
                   District Judges.



                           (b) Thereafter, they shall be subjected to
                   an interview by a Selection Committee consisting
                   of the Chief Justice and four seniormost Judges
                   of that High Court.



                          (c) There shall be 150 marks for the
                   written examination and 100 marks for the
                   interview. The qualifying marks shall be 40%
                   aggregate for general candidates and 35% for
                   SC/ST/OBC candidates. The examination and
                   interview shall be held in accordance with the
                   relevant Rules enacted by the States for direct
                   appointment to Higher Judicial Services.



                         (d) Each of the appointees shall be entitled
                   to one mark per year of service in the FTCs,
                   which shall form part of the interview marks.



                           (e) Needless to point out that this
                   examination and interview should be conducted
                   by the respective High Courts keeping in mind
                   that all these applicants have put in a number of
                   years as FTC Judges and have served the country
                   by administering justice in accordance with law.
                   The written examination and interview module,
                   should, thus, be framed keeping in mind the
                   peculiar facts and circumstances of these cases.



                          (f) The candidates who qualify the written
                   examination and obtain consolidated percentage
                   as aforeindicated shall be appointed to the post of
                   Additional District Judge in the regular cadre of
                   the State.



 
(g) If, for any reason, vacancies are not
                   available in the regular cadre, we hereby direct
                   the State Governments to create such additional
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               48


                   vacancies as may be necessary keeping in view
                   the number of candidates selected.



                          (h) All sitting and/or former FTC Judges
                   who were directly appointed from the Bar and are
                   desirous of taking the examination and interview
                   for regular appointment shall be given age
                   relaxation. No application shall be rejected on the
                   ground of age of the applicant being in excess of
                   the prescribed age.



                   207.10. The members of the Bar who have directly
               been appointed but whose services were either
               dispensed with or terminated on the ground of
               doubtful integrity, unsatisfactory work or against
               whom, on any other ground, disciplinary action had
               been taken, shall not be eligible to the benefits stated
               in para 207.9 of the judgment.



                  207.11. Keeping in view the need of the hour and
               the constitutional mandate to provide fair and
               expeditious trial to all litigants and the citizens of the
               country, we direct the respective States and the
               Central Government to create 10% of the total regular
               cadre of the State as additional posts within three
               months from today and take up the process for filling
               such additional vacancies as per the Higher Judicial
               Service and Judicial Services Rules of that State,
               immediately thereafter.



                   207.12. These directions, of course, are in addition
               to and not in derogation of the recommendations that
               may be made by the Law Commission of India and
               any other order which may be passed by the courts of
               competent jurisdiction, in other such matters.



                  207.13. The candidates from any State, who were
               promoted as FTC Judges from the post of Civil Judge,
               Senior Division having requisite experience in
               service, shall be entitled to be absorbed and remain
               promoted to the Higher Judicial Services of that State
               subject to:

 
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               49


                          (a) Such promotion, when effected against
                   the 25% quota for out-of-turn promotion on
                   merit, in accordance with the judgment of this
                   Court in All India Judges’ Assn. (3) 1, by taking
                   and being selected through the requisite
                   examination, as contemplated for out-of-turn
                   promotion.



                          (b) If the appointee has the requisite
                   seniority and is entitled to promotion against 25%
                   quota for promotion by seniority-cum-merit, he
                   shall be promoted on his own turn to the Higher
                   Judicial    Services      without    any    written
                   examination.



                          (c) While considering candidates either
                   under Category (a) or (b) above, due weightage
                   shall be given to the fact that they have already
                   put in a number of years in service in the Higher
                   Judicial Services and, of course, with reference to
                   their performance.



                          (d) All other appointees in this category, in
                   the event of discontinuation of the FTC Scheme,
                   would revert to their respective posts in the
                   appropriate cadre.”



 
22.    In the selection process undertaken pursuant to the Notification

     dated 31.03.2011 for filling up vacancies through Direct Recruitment, LCE

     and Promotion, only 9 candidates could clear LCE against 22 vacancies

     meant for that category. This number got reduced to 8 as the candidature of

     one of the successful candidates was not accepted. Resultantly, the unfilled

     vacancies meant for LCE were added to the quota for Promotees and by
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               50


     Government Order dated 15.07.2013 appropriate Appointment Orders were

     issued. The text of the Order was as under:-



               “In exercise of the powers conferred by 
Article 233(1)

               of the Constitution of India read with Rule 43 of the
               Rajasthan Judicial Service Rules, 2010, the Governor
               of the State of Rajasthan on the recommendation of
               the Rajasthan High Court is pleased to appoint the
               following persons recruited by promotion, limited
               competitive examination and direct recruitment to the
               Rajasthan Judicial Service in the District Judge Cadre
               in the pay scale of Rs.51550-1230-58930-1380-63070
               [District Judge (Entry Level)] with such allowances as
               are admissible as per rules and their pay shall be fixed
               as per rules. The persons appointed by direct
               recruitment shall be placed on probation for a period
               of two years from the date of assuming charge of their
               office as per Rule 44 of the Rajasthan Judicial Service
               Rules, 2010:…”

            Thereafter, the names of 87 candidates were mentioned and the

     names of 8 successful candidates in LCE were at Sr. Nos. 10, 19, 30, 39,

     50 59, 65 and 68.



 
23.    In the meantime, by Notification dated 31.03.2013 issued by the

     High Court, 58 vacancies were determined for the years 2012-13 and

     2013-14 in the cadre of District Judge. This Notification also stated that in

     case the cadre strength was revised to 362, the vacancies in the cadre of

     District Judge would be 165. On 14.09.2013, the strength of District Judge

     cadre was revised to 372. By Notification dated 01.04.2014 issued by the

     High Court, 204 vacancies were determined in the cadre of District Judge
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               51


     for the years 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15. The relevant portion of the

     Notification dated 01.04.2014 was as under:-



                 “In suppression of earlier notification No.Estt.
                 (RJS)/06/2014 dated 15.01.2014, as per schedule I of
                 RJS rules 2010, the determination of vacancies in
                 District Judge Cadre for the year 2012-2013, 2013-14
                 and 2014-15 is hereby notified as under:-

                 As per cadre strength – 372
                 Total vacancies – 186 + 18* = 204
                 Vacancies for district recruitment – 41
                 Vacancies for promotion by limited competitive
                 examination – 29
                 Vacancies for promotion – 116
                 *Note:- 18 future vacancies (against 10% of the total
                 Number of vacancies) are not assigned to any
                 category for the present. However, these will be given
                 as per roaster to the particular category wherein any
                 vacancy(ies) on account of death elevation, dismissal
                 etc. will arise.”



     24.    On 21.04.2014, 56 Senior Civil Judges were promoted as

     Additional District and Sessions Judges on Ad-hoc basis. The Order recited

     as under.



                 “On the recommendation of Rajasthan High Court,
                 H.E. the Governor of State of Rajasthan is pleased to
                 appoint the following 56 officers purely on ad-hoc
                 basis as Additional District and Sessions Judge in the
                 District Judge cadre under Rule 15 of the Rajasthan
                 Judicial Service Rules, 2010:-”

            The names of concerned 56 Judicial Officers were thereafter

     mentioned in the Order.

 
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               52


     25.    On 15.12.2014 a final seniority list of all the Judicial Officers who

     were then in service and appointed under the provisions of 1969 Rules

     prior to 2008 (from Serial Nos.1 to 205) was published. This seniority list

     is not under challenge and is accepted to be correct by all the concerned.



     26.    A Notification was issued on 31.03.2015 by the High Court

     determining cumulative vacancies in the cadre of District Judge for the

     years 2012-13, 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16 as under:-



               “In supersession of earlier Notification No.Estt.
               (RJS)/33/2014 dated 01.04.2014, as per Schedule-1 of
               RJS Rules, 2010, the cumulative vacancies in District
               judge cadre for the years 2012-13, 2-13-14, 2014-15
               & 2015-16 are hereby determined and notified as
               under:-

               As per cadre strength                372


               Total Vacancies = 207+21             228


 
Vacancies for Direct Recruitment       44
               Vacancies for promotion by Limited

               Competitive Examination                29


               Vacancies for promotion              134


               *Note:- 21 future vacancies (against 10% of the total
               Number of vacancies) are not assigned to any
               category for the present. However, these will be given
               as per roster to the particular category wherein any
               vacancy (ies) on account of death elevation, dismissal
               etc. will arise.”


     26.1   Pursuant to the selection undertaken thereafter by Order dated

     05.02.2016, 175 candidates were appointed to the cadre of District Judge,
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               53


     which included recruitment through Promotion, LCE and Direct

     Recruitment, . The Order stated :-



               “i. This Select List in cyclic order has been
               prepared of the candidates being recommended
               for appointment while leaving one post unfilled
               for a candidate Shri. Akhilesh Kumar selected
               through Direct Recruitment. However, it is
               notified that this list shall remain subject to
               revision after receipt of complete verification
               report from State Government with regard to Shri
               Akhilesh Kumar and on his being recommended
               by the Court for appointment, he shall occupy the
               roster point in the cyclic order as he would have
               occupied if included in the original list as per his
               position in order or merit.

 
ii. This Select List in cyclic order has been
               prepared of the candidates being recommended
               for appointment while leaving eight posts unfilled
               for eight Sr. Civil Judges, failing in the zone of
               consideration for promotion on merit-cum-
               seniority basis as their consideration has been
               deferred due to pendency of departmental
               enquiries against them. However, it is notified that
               this list shall remain subject to revision after
               outcome of the departmental enquiries with regard
               to the said eight Sr. Civil Judges and on their
               being recommended by the court for promotion;
               they shall occupy the roster point in the cycle
               order as they would have occupied if included in
               the original list as per their position in order of
               interese seniority in their feeder cadre.”


     26.2.   The petitioners in Writ Petition (Civil) No.895 of 2019, Writ

     Petition (Civil) No.897 of 2019 and Writ Petition (Civil) No.899 of 2019
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               54


     were promoted to the cadre of District Judge by aforesaid order dated

     05.02.2016.



     27.    Thereafter, a Provisional Seniority List was issued vide

     communication dated 16.08.2017 as regards Judicial Officers from Serial

     Nos. 206 onwards. The communication recited as under:-



               “TENTATIVE DETERMINATION OF SENIORITY
               OF THE OFFICERS OF DISTRICT JUDGE
               CADRE.

                                         ****
               Final Seniority List of the officers of District Judge
               Cadre upto Shri Nagendra Pal Bhandari was
               published on 15.12.2014.

               After taking into consideration, the representations
               received from the officers of different categories and
               all relevant provisions, the tentative/provisional
               seniority list of the officers of District Judge Cadre
               next to Shri Nagendra Pal Bhandari is
               reckoned/proposed:”

            The names of all the concerned candidates were mentioned in the

     Provisional Seniority List. The candidates, who were successful in LCE

     were given the original order of Seniority in the feeder cadre without

     giving them any benefit for having successfully cleared the LCE. Further

     the 47 Judicial Officers promoted on 21.04.2010 were en-bloc placed

     above all the appointees pursuant to selection undertaken in 2011.



 
28.    In August 2018, Writ Petition Nos.936 of 2018 and 967 of 2018

     namely Writ Petitions in Categories A and B referred to in Para 1
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               55


     hereinabove were filed in this Court submitting inter alia that post the

     coming into effect of 2010 Rules, all the appointments in the categories of

     selection through LCE and Direct Recruitment had to be in conformity

     with 2010 Rules and in tune with the Cyclic Order; that placement of the

     47 Judicial Officers whose Appointment Orders were issued after the

     process was undertaken in the year 2010 for selection of candidates

     through LCE and Direct Recruitment, was not correct.



     29.    Notice was issued by this Court in aforesaid Writ Petition (Civil)

     Nos.936 of 2018 and 967 of 2018 on 20.09.2018. On 14.12.2018 the

     learned counsel for the High Court submitted that the objections to the

     Provisional Lists were pending consideration with the High Court.



 
Therefore, at his request the petitions were adjourned. Thereafter, the

     entire matter was considered by the High Court and by its Report dated

     15.03.2019 all the objections raised by the concerned candidates were dealt

     with. The report was thereafter placed on record. On 18.07.2019 when said

     Writ Petitions and all other connected matters were taken up, it was

     highlighted that the 47 Judicial Officers were not promoted in conformity

     with Rule 32(1) of 2010 Rules, and, in any case, the principle of Cyclic

     Order, in terms of Rule 42, was also not complied with and yet they were

     placed at Serial Nos.206 to 250. Since the 47 Judicial Officers were not
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               56


     parties to the present proceedings, notice was issued to them by Order

     dated 18.07.2019.



     30.    In the meantime, the Report of the Committee of five Judges of the

     High Court under the Chairmanship of the Chief Justice of the High Court

     which had considered all the representations was placed on record. The

     Committee had framed following four questions for its consideration in

     said Report dated 15.03.2019:-



                    (1)   Whether the officers, who were promoted
                          on the post of Additional District Judge
                          (Fast Track) on ad-hoc basis under Rule 22
                          of the Rules of 1969, can claim seniority
                          from the date of such ad-hoc promotion in
                          view of the first proviso to Rule 24 of the
                          Rules of 1969, by virtue of saving clause
                          in Rule 57 of the Rules of 2010, which
                          were enforced on 19.01.2010?



                    (2)   Whether the process of selection for direct
                          recruitment against 36 posts determined in
                          the year 2010-11 should be taken to have
                          commenced from 15.04.2010 when initial
                          advertisement for recruitment was issued
                          or from 19.07.2011 when fresh
                          advertisement was issued after earlier
                          process was cancelled with the decision of
                          the High Court to hold the process of
                          recruitment afresh?



 
(3)   Whether seniority of officers of the same
                          batch promoted to the District Judge cadre
                          in the Limited Competitive Examination
                          quota, should be prepared on the basis of
                          their inter-se placement in the merit list of
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               57


                          such examination under Rule 32(2) or
                          should be, in view of Rule 47(4) of the
                          Rules of 2010, the same as it was in Senior
                          Civil Judge cadre?



                    (4)   Whether seniority of the officers promoted
                          to the District Judge cadre in view of Rule
                          31(4), is required to be fixed in cyclic
                          order as per roster given in Schedule V to
                          Rules of 2010 with adherence to quota-

                          rota rule and what bearing in the facts of
                          the case, the opening words “As far as
                          possible” in Rule 42 of the Rules, would
                          have on determination of seniority?



     30.1   Before dealing with the aforesaid four questions, the scope of the

     matter was dealt with as under:-



                    “The Rajasthan High Court notified the
                    provisional seniority list of the officers of the
                    District Judge cadre next to Shri Nagendra Pal
                    Singh Bhandari on 16.08.2017, inviting
                    objections thereto. This seniority list started
                    from Shri N.S. Dhaddha at serial no.206 and
                    continued upto Shri Mohammad Arif at serial
                    no.519. Recruitment to District Judge cadre is
                    made by three methods – 65% by promotion,
                    10% by Limited Competitive Examination (for
                    short, ‘LCE), both from amongst the Senior
                    Civil Judges and 25% by direct recruitment from
                    the members of the Bar. The officers from all
                    the three streams submitted their written
                    objections to the provisional seniority list.
                    Meeting of the Committee was convened under
                    the Chairmanship of the Chief Justice in the
                    Committee Hall of the High Court premises at
                    Jodhpur on 06.01.2019. Their oral submissions
                    were also heard in support of the written
                    objections already submitted.

 
… … …
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               58


                    We may at the outset make it clear that we do
                    not wish to unsettle the seniority position which
                    has attained finality insofar as final seniority list
                    dated 15.12.2014 is concerned, because no one
                    from any of the three streams of recruitment has
                    ever challenged the same before any forum
                    known to law. However, at the same time, we
                    wish to make it clear at this stage itself that
                    while deciding the objections as to correctness
                    of the provisional seniority list dated
                    16.08.2017, we may not agree and may deviate
                    from the principles on which the conclusions of
                    the earlier seniority committee in its report are
                    founded.”


     30.2   With regard to first question the conclusion arrived at by the

     Committee was as under:-



 
“In view of the position of law discussed above,
                    we are not persuaded to countenance the
                    submission that the promotes against the posts
                    outside the cadre should be taken to have been
                    promoted from the date of their ad hoc
                    promotion either in the fast track courts or any
                    other court, for the purpose of grant of seniority
                    with reference to proviso to Rule 24 even though
                    their regular promotion has actually taken place
                    after the Rules of 1969 were repealed and the
                    Rules of 2010 were promulgated on 19.01.2010.
                    We also cannot uphold the argument that any
                    right stood crystalized in favour of such
                    promotes by reason of prescription made in
                    proviso to Rule 24 and such right, by virtue of
                    the savings clause under Rule 57 of the Rules of
                    2010, would remain protected so as to entitle
                    them to claim seniority from the date of initial
                    promotion on ad hoc basis even if their regular
                    promotion has taken place later than the
                    promulgation of the Rules of 2010. We are not
                    examining the correctness of the order granting
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               59


                    selection scale to certain officers by counting the
                    ad hoc service towards requisite period of five
                    years, but that cannot justify giving the benefit
                    of seniority on the basis of ad hoc promotion in
                    view of the interpretation of the extant rules we
                    have taken in the light of settled proposition of
                    law. In our considered view, all those who were
                    promoted on ad hoc basis earlier under the Rules
                    of 1969, prior to promulgation of the Rules of
                    2010, can be given seniority only from the date
                    of their substantive appointment, upon regular
                    promotion, which took place after the Rules of
                    2010 came into force with effect from
                    19.01.2010.      There is therefore no legal
                    justification for en-bloc placement of such
                    officers in the provisional seniority list on the
                    basis of revision of cadre strength, when
                    temporary/permanent posts included in the cadre
                    with increase of its strength from 150 to 245 and
                    every time later when the cadre strength was
                    revised from 246 to 255, 256 to 265 and 266 to
                    372 respectively.”

     30.3   With regard to second question the conclusion was as under:-



 
“In the case at hand, it should be noted that the
                    process of recruitment was initially notified vide
                    advertisement dated 15.04.2010, but the entire
                    selection process both by direct recruitment as
                    well by promotion through LCE was abandoned
                    pursuant to decision of the Full Court, which is
                    evident from the order of the Registrar General
                    of the Rajasthan High Court dated 22.09.2010,
                    whereby it was decided that recruitment process
                    shall be initiated afresh. New process of
                    selection/recruitment was started in both these
                    categories by notification dated 19.07.2011. Out
                    of 41 candidates, who were selected in the year
                    2013 by way of direct recruitment pursuant to
                    the said notification, there are at least 15 such
                    candidates, whose names did not find place
                    either in the eligibility list or rejection list, as per
                    the information furnished by the Examination
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                                 60


                    Cell of the High Court. These names are – (1)
                    Shri Malkhan Singh, (2) Shri Ram Suresh
                    Prasad, (3) Shri Manchha Ram Suthar, (4) Shri
                    Keshav Kaushik, (5) Shri Dinesh Tyagi, (6) Shri
                    Hariom Sharma Attri, (7) Shri Arun Kumar
                    Beriwal, (8) Shri Hukam Singh Rajpurohit, (9)
                    Ms. Shivani Singh, (10) Shri Mashroor Alam
                    Khan, (11) Ramesh Prashad Choudhary, (12)
                    Ms. Meenakshi Sharma, (13) Ms. Anu
                    Aggarwal, (14) Shri Kishan Chand, and (15)
                    Shri Satish Kumar. This proves that either they
                    were not eligible, or even if eligible, they did not
                    apply in response to the earlier notification for
                    recruitment dated 15.04.2010. We are therefore
                    not inclined to uphold the claim of direct recruits
                    that they should be conferred the benefit of
                    seniority from the year 2010. In any event, the
                    direct recruits cannot claim seniority earlier than
                    initiation of fresh process of selection pursuant
                    to notification dated 19.07.2011 during the year
                    2011-12. The result of this would be that these
                    direct recruits would not be entitled to claim
                    seniority over at least those 47 officers, who
                    were promoted on regular basis vide order dated
                    21.04.2010 in the year 2010-11 after the Rules
                    of 2010 came into force. The direct recruits
                    cannot therefore claim seniority above those
                    officers, who were promoted on regular basis
                    soon after promulgation of the Rules of 2010,
                    when they were not even borne on the cadre.”
                                                                 (emphasis supplied)

     30.4   While dealing with third question the Committee concluded:-



 
“…We are therefore of the view that merit of
                    those promoted through LCE should by virtue of
                    Rule 32(2) be considered as the benchmark for
                    promotion, inter-se seniority amongst them in
                    the feeder cadre being maintained by
                    prescription of Rule 47(4), subject to the
                    exception that if an officer by regular method of
                    promotion is able to otherwise secure promotion
                    in the same year in the regular line on his turn
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               61


                    and on that basis he gets a higher placement in
                    the seniority, regardless of his selection in the
                    LCE, he should not be put to a disadvantageous
                    position and allowed to retain his position in the
                    seniority based on his regular promotion. In
                    other words, such officer would be entitled to
                    retain seniority, either on the basis of LCE or on
                    the basis of regular promotion, whichever is
                    more beneficial to him.”

     30.5   Finally, while dealing with fourth question, the Committee took

     into account that there was no actual recruitment in the years 2012-13,

     2013-14 and 2014-15 and the recruitment process commenced by the

     Notification dated 26.04.2015 was with regard to vacancies of all four

     years i.e. 2012-13, 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16. In the circumstances, it

     was concluded:-



               “As far as the period subsequent to the roster order
               dated 15.07.2013 is concerned, the determination of
               vacancies was made every year fairly regularly as
               noticed above, but actual recruitment from none of the
               three modes could take place in any one of the years
               2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15. Finally again the
               recruitment process commenced by notification dated
               26.04.2015 in the year 2015-16. Since the vacancies
               of all four years, viz., 2012-13, 2013-14, 2014-15 and
               2015-16, were combined, even if some of the officers
               were in between allowed to continue on the post of
               Additional District & Sessions Judge on ad hoc basis,
               they cannot in view of the afore-discussed provisions
               of the Rules claim seniority on that basis. The
               vacancies of all these four years having been
               determined as those of the year 2015-16, all the
               appointments, by direct recruitment, LCE or regular
               promotion, should be deemed to belong to the year
               2015-16.

 
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               62


               …. …. …

               Perusal of the provisional seniority list shows that all
               56 officers starting from Shri Satish Kumar Vyas
               (S.No.369) upto Shri Jai Prakash Narain Purohit
               (S.No.423), promoted on ad hoc basis vide order
               dated 21.04.2014 as Additional District Judge in the
               DJ cadre under Rule 15 of the Rules of 2010, have
               been wrongly assigned higher seniority. Thereafter, 26
               officers starting from Shri Paras Kumar Jain
               (S.No.4224) upto Shri Jagendra Kumar Agarwal
               (S.No.450), all promoted on ad hoc basis by order
               dated 21.04.2015 also have been wrongly assigned
               higher seniority in the provisional seniority list. The
               next slot of officers starting from Shri Ashok Kumar
               Agarwal (S.No.451) onwards though have been
               promoted on regular basis by order dated 05.02.2016,
               but they have been all placed en-bloc senior to those
               who were selected against direct recruitment quota.
               Surprisingly, the cadre strength was initially increased
               with the enforcement of the Rules of 2010 on
               19.01.2010, but the High Court administration has
               applied the same analogy of revision of cadre strength
               even on three subsequent occasions for placing all the
               officers appointed on ad hoc basis en-bloc in the
               seniority above those directly recruited. Some of the
               officers, who though got regular promotion vide order
               dated 05.02.2016, deviating from the roster point
               indicated in the order of promotion dated 05.02.2016,
               have been placed en-bloc above the officers of direct
               recruitment and LCE quota by wrongly applying the
               proviso to Rule 24 as if this repealed Rule would
               perpetually survive by mere reason of ad hoc
               promotions, for each succeeding year. Grant of benefit
               of seniority to officers promoted on ad hoc basis was
               thus contrary to the provisions contained in Rule 15
               and 47(4).



 
Taking all the aforementioned circumstances into
               account, we are inclined to hold that each of the years
               2012-13, 2013-14, 2014-15 for the purpose of
               operating the roster system should be treated as zero
               recruitment year and that the recruitment against
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               63


               combined 207 vacancies determined for these years
               and the year 2015-16, should be taken as the
               vacancies of the year 2015-16 so as to make the Rule
               42 of the Rules of 2010 workable, which begins with
               the phraseology “As far as possible”, a select list as
               provided in Schedule-V shall be prepared by the High
               Court. Such select list in the cyclic order as per the
               roster point was earlier prepared by order dated
               15.07.2013 and also when the next regular selections
               took place vide order dated 05.02.2016 but this was
               not truly reflected in the seniority list. All the officers
               promoted on regular basis by order dated 05.02.2016
               should be taken to have been substantively appointed
               from that date only. If this view is taken, no prejudice
               would be caused to any class of the officers as none of
               them would compete for promotion/appointment in
               their respective category in previous three years.
               Vacancies of all these three years having been clubbed
               with the vacancies of the year 2015-16 to be
               determined as the vacancies of that year, each one of
               them has had opportunity to compete with his fellow
               officers/candidates for substantive appointment by
               way of promotion/LCE/direct-recruitment, to the DJ
               cadre together.”



 
31.    Mr. Ranjit Kumar, learned Senior Advocate and Mr. A.D.N. Rao,

     learned Advocate for the petitioners in Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of

     2018, and Mr. P.S. Patwalia and Mr. Nitesh Gupta, learned Senior

     Advocates for the petitioners in Writ Petition (Civil) No.967 of 2018

     submitted that in terms of the provisions of 2010 Rules, any appointments

     made after said Rules came into effect, had to be in conformity with the

     principles therein and in accordance with the percentages for three

     different sources set out therein. It was submitted that before 2010 Rules
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               64


     came into effect, the strength of the cadre of District Judge in the State

     was 150 and it got raised to 245 only after 2010 Rules came into effect.



     Relying on the decisions of this Court in Debabrata Dash and Another v.



     Jatindra Prasad Das and Others16, V. Venkata Prasad and Others v.



 
High Court of A.P. and Other17 and in 
Kum C. Yamini v. The State of

     Andhra Pradesh18
, it was submitted that no service rendered on ad-hoc

     basis as Fast Track Court Judges could be counted and that the rights

     of such candidates to be considered for promotion arose only after

     2010 Rules     and     that since the     Notification   dated   31.03.2010

     notified   vacancies to      be filled up by Direct      Recruitment     and

     through LCE, the High Court could not have promoted the 47 Judicial

     Officers by Order dated 21.04.2010 so as to adversely affect the chances

     and status of the petitioners. It was submitted that the entire exercise must

     be taken to be one single package under which appointments through all

     three sources could be undertaken after the vacancies became available by

     enhancement of cadre strength; and that the entire exercise undertaken

     after issuance of the Notification on 31.03.2011 was nothing but

     continuation of what was contemplated by the Notification dated

     15.04.2010. It was, therefore, submitted that the vacancies which were
     16 (2013) 3 SCC 658
     17 (2016) 11 SCC 656
     18 (2019) 10 SCALE     834 = 2019(8 ) JT 365
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.


Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               65


 
subject matter of Notification dated 31.03.2011 and the posting of the 47

     Judicial Officers pursuant to Order dated 21.04.2010 must be considered

     as part of the same process. Resultantly, the placement of the concerned

     candidates ought to be governed by the Cyclic Order enumerated in

     Schedule VII to 2010 Rules. Reliance was placed on the decision of this

     Court in 
Union of India and Others v. N. R. Parmar and Others19
.




            Mr. Nikhil Singhvi, learned Advocate for the petitioners in Writ

     Petition (Civil) Diary No.13252 of 2019 added another dimension in

     respect of LCE candidates. It was submitted that in keeping with the

     directions issued by this Court in para 28 in All India Judges’

     Association1 the promotions through LCE must be “strictly on the basis of

     merit” and that Rule 31(2) of 2010 Rules translates the same principle

     and, therefore, the ranking of the candidates who had cleared LCE must

     be in accordance with merit and not in accordance with their inter se

     seniority in the erstwhile cadre.



 
32.       On the other hand, Mr. R. Balasubramanian, learned Senior

     Advocate and Ms. Prerna Singh, learned Advocate appearing for the 47

     candidates submitted that said candidates were promoted well before the


     19   (2012) 13 SCC 340
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               66


     initiation of selection process initiated pursuant to the Notification dated

     31.03.2011; that said Notification was not in continuation of the process

     initiated in 2010; that number of candidates who were selected in the

     selection process pursuant to the Notification dated 31.03.2011 had not

     even participated in the process initiated in 2010 and the Committee of the

     High Court in its Report dated 15.03.2019 rightly answered Question

     No.2 in the negative. In their submission, the issue of regular promotion

     of those who were manning the Fast Track Court on ad-hoc basis was

     always under consideration right from 23.08.2008 when a Committee of

     the High Court had made its recommendations. In the process, the case of

     the 47 candidates stood on a completely different footing          and the

     Committee of the High Court in its Report dated 15.03.2019 rightly

     acknowledged their entitlement.



 
33.    Mr. Vijay Hansaria, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the

     petitioners in Writ Petition (Civil) No.464 of 2019 submitted that all these

     petitioners were appointed on ad-hoc basis as Fast Track Court Judges in

     the year 2008 and as a matter of fact, 4 Judicial Officers who were also

     appointed along with these petitioners in the year 2008 were part of the list

     of the 47 candidates at Serial Nos.44 to 47 whereas these petitioners were

     not included in said list. These Petitioners, therefore, pray that the order
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               67


     dated 15.03.2019 be set aside to the extent it deprived said petitioners of

     their rightful due and they be given seniority from their initial appointment

     as Judges of the Fast Track Court that is from 11.01.2008 or, at least, above

     all LCE candidates and Direct Recruits as was given to the 47 candidates.



     It was further submitted that out of 83 Fast Track Courts which were

     mentioned in Part A of Schedule II to 2010 Rules, 40 Courts were

     abolished on 31.03.2011 and the petitioners were continued as Additional

     District Judges against vacant regular posts vide Order dated 31.03.2011.



     However, their substantive promotion to the Cadre of District Judge was

     made on 15.07.2013 along with the Direct Recruits and candidates through

     LCE. It was submitted that their initial appointments being under 1969

     Rules and the fact that they were occupying posts indicated in Part A of

     Schedule II as stated above, their case would be covered by Rule 57 of

     2010 Rules. It was however accepted that some of the petitioners had

     participated in the LCE around that time.



 
34.     Mr. Neeraj Jain, learned Senior Advocate for the Association in

     Writ Petition (Civil) No.1471 of 2018 submitted that as acknowledged in

     the decision of this Court in Rajasthan Judicial Service Officers

     Association11 there were 41 Direct Recruits in the Cadre of District Judges

     in the year 2009 and as such it was incorrect to assess the vacancies for
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               68


     Direct Recruits in the Notifications dated 15.04.2010 and 31.03.20111 at

     the level of 36 and 37 respectively. In his submission the allocation of

     vacancies to Direct Recruits was in excess of their entitlement.



     35.     Mr. V.K. Shukla, learned Senior Advocate appeared for the

     petitioners in Writ Petition (Civil) No.899 of 2019, who were promoted on

     ad-hoc basis as Additional District and Sessions Judges to man the Fast

     Track Courts on 21.04.2010 i.e. after 2010 Rules had come into force and

     who were substantively promoted to the Cadre of District Judge by Order

     dated 05.02.2016. It was submitted that their services at the level of

     Additional District and Sessions Judge were continued even after

     abolition of Fast Track Courts and thus said petitioners ought to be given

     the benefit of past service and be conferred appropriate seniority.



     36.     Dr. Sumant Bhardwaj, learned Advocate appeared for the

     petitioner in Writ Petition (Civil) No.1008 of 2019, where the petitioner

     stands on similar footing as in Writ Petition (Civil) No.899 of 2019, in

     that the ad-hoc promotion to the Cadre of District Judge was granted in

     the year 2012.

 
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                                69


     37.     Dr. Manish Singhvi, and Mr. Sanjay Hegde, learned Senior

     Advocates appearing for the State and the High Court respectively

     supported the actions taken by the High Court on the administrative side.



     38.     In the backdrop of the facts and circumstances on record and the

     submissions of all the learned Counsel, following questions arise for our

     consideration:-



     (A)     Whether the judicial officers promoted on ad-hoc basis as

     Additional District and Sessions Judges to man the Fast Track Courts in

     the State and who were substantively appointed to the Cadre of the

     District Judge, are entitled to seniority from the date of their initial ad-hoc

     promotion?



     (B)     Whether the selection process initiated in terms of the Notification

     dated 31.03.2011 can be said to be in continuation of the process initiated

     under Notification dated 15.04.2010?



 
(C)     Whether the substantive promotion granted to the 47 Judicial

     Officers must be taken to be part of the same selection process pursuant to

     the Notification dated 31.03.2011 and whether the 47 Judicial Officers

     could be placed en-bloc senior to the candidates selected in said selection
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               70


     process initiated pursuant to the Notification dated 31.03.2011, without

     applying the Cyclic Order in terms of 2010 Rules?



     (D)     Whether the inter se placement of candidates selected to the Cadre

     of District Judge in the State through Limited Competitive Examination,

     in the seniority list must be based on their merit in said examination or

     should it be based on their initial seniority in the erstwhile cadre?



     (E)     Whether the Report dated 15.03.2019 and the consequential Final

     Seniority List, otherwise calls for any modification or correction?



     39.     As regards question No. (A), the law on the point is well settled

     and though learned Counsel advanced submissions based on various

     decisions of this Court and the principles emanating therefrom, the

     following decisions in the context of ad-hoc appointments as Additional

     District and Sessions Judges to man Fast Track Courts in the country, are

     sufficient to address the issue.



 
(A)     In 
Debabrata Dash and Another v. Jatindra Prasad Das and

     Others16
, a Bench of three Judges of this Court considered the case

     wherein respondent No.1 was initially appointed as Additional District

     Judge (Fast Track Court) on ad-hoc basis and later his service was

     regularized in the Senior Branch Cadre in Orrisa Superior Judicial Service.
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.


Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               71


     His claim that service rendered as Judge of the Fast Track Court ought to

     be reckoned for seniority was accepted by the Orissa High Court. This

     Court, however, set aside the decision of the High Court. The question that

     came up for consideration was posed in para 28 as under:-



                  “28. The crucial question          that   arises   for
               consideration in this appeal is:

                   whether promotion of the writ petitioner as an ad
               hoc Additional District Judge vide Notification dated
               5-1-2002 to the Senior Branch of the Superior Judicial
               Service for being posted in the Fast Track Court
               established out of the Eleventh Finance Commission
               recommendations can be said to be an appointment in
               the Senior Branch Cadre of Superior Judicial Service?



                   The fate of the appeal depends upon the answer to
               this question. If the answer to this question is found in
               the affirmative, the appeal must fail. On the other
               hand, the appeal must succeed if the answer is in the
               negative.”


           This Court thereafter considered the effect of 2001 Rules which

     were made to regulate the recruitment of Judicial Officers in the State to

     man Fast Track Courts on ad-hoc basis. Para 35 considered the effect of

     the Rules as under:-



 
“35. As noted earlier, 72 posts of ad hoc Additional
               District Judges were created under the 2001 Rules to
               meet its objectives. These posts were not part of cadre
               strength of Senior Branch Service in the 1963 Rules
               nor by creation of these posts under the 2001 Rules,
               the cadre strength of the Senior Branch of service got
               increased. The writ petitioner’s promotion as an ad
               hoc Additional District Judge vide Notification dated
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               72


                   5-1-2002 pursuant to which he joined the post of ad
                   hoc Additional District Judge, Bargarh on 26-4-2002
                   is traceable wholly and squarely to the 2001 Rules.
                   Merely because the writ petitioner was adjudged
                   suitable on the touchstone of the 1963 Rules, we are
                   afraid, it cannot be said that he was given
                   appointment to the post of ad hoc Additional District
                   Judge under the 1963 Rules. As noted above, there
                   was no vacancy to be filled by promotion in the cadre
                   strength of Senior Branch of the service under the
                   1963 Rules on that date.”

                   The decisions of this Court in Direct Recruit Class II Engg.



     Officers’ Assn.20 and Rudra Kumar Sain21 as well as in Brij Mohan Lal6

     were also considered as under:-



 
41. A five-Judge Bench of this Court in Direct
                   Recruit Class II Engg. Officers’ Assn. 20 was
                   concerned with a question of seniority in service
                   between the direct recruits and promotees amongst
                   Deputy Engineers in the State of Maharashtra. This
                   Court considered previous decisions of this Court,
                   including 
S.B. Patwardhan v. State of Maharashtra22

                   and 
Baleshwar Dass v. State of U.P.23
 and in para 47
                   of the Report summed up the legal position. Clauses
                   (A), (B) and (C) of para 47 are relevant for the present
                   purpose which read as follows: (Direct Recruit Class
                   II Engg. Officers’ Assn.20, SCC p. 745, para 47)

                                “(A) Once an incumbent is appointed to a
                          post according to rule, his seniority has to be
                          counted from the date of his appointment and
                          not according to the date of his confirmation.


 
The corollary of the above rule is that where the
                        initial appointment is only ad hoc and not
                        according to rules and made as a stopgap

     20   (1990)   2   SCC   715
     21   (2008)   8   SCC   25
     22   (1977)   3   SCC   399
     23   (1980)   4   SCC   226
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               73


                  arrangement, the officiation in such post cannot be
                  taken into account for considering the seniority.



                        (B) If the initial appointment is not made by
                  following the procedure 
laid down by
 the rules but
                  the appointee continues in the post uninterruptedly
                  till the regularisation of his service in accordance
                  with the rules, the period of officiating service will
                  be counted.



                       (C) When appointments are made from more
                  than one source, it is permissible to fix the ratio
                  for recruitment from the different sources, and if
                  rules are framed in this regard they must ordinarily
                  be followed strictly.”

               The essence of direction in Clause (A) is that the
               seniority of an appointee has to be counted from the
               date of his appointment and not according to the date
               of his confirmation once a recruitee is appointed to a
               post according to the rules. In other words, where
               initial appointment is only ad hoc and not according
               to the rules and made as a stopgap arrangement, the
               officiation in such post cannot be taken into account
               for considering the seniority. The writ petitioner’s
               appointment as an ad hoc Additional District Judge is
               not traceable to the 1963 Rules. The simple reason
               leading to this consequence is that there was no
               vacancy available which was to be filled up by
               promotion on that date in the Superior Judicial
               Service (Senior Branch).



 
42. In Rudra Kumar Sain21 a five-Judge Bench of
               this Court was again concerned with the inter se
               seniority between the promotees and direct recruits in
               the Delhi Higher Judicial Service. The contention was
               whether the guidelines and directions given by this
               Court in O.P. Singla24 have been followed or not. The
               Court considered the 3 terms “ad hoc”, “stopgap” and
               “fortuitous” in the context of the service jurisprudence

     24 (1984) 4 SCC 450
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                                      74


                and in para 20 of the Report held as under: (Rudra
                Kumar Sain case21, SCC p. 45)

                   “20. In service jurisprudence, a person who
                   possesses the requisite qualification for being
                   appointed to a particular post and then he is
                   appointed with the approval and consultation of
                   the appropriate authority and continues in the post
                   for a fairly long period, then such an appointment
                   cannot be held to be ‘stopgap or fortuitous or
                   purely ad hoc’. In this view of the matter, the
                   reasoning and basis on which the appointment of
                   the promotees in the Delhi Higher Judicial Service
                   in the case in hand was held by the High Court to
                   be ‘fortuitous/ad hoc/stopgap’ are wholly
                   erroneous and, therefore, exclusion of those
                   appointees to have their continuous length of
                   service for seniority is erroneous.”

                The Division Bench in the impugned order 25 has
                quoted the above paragraph from Rudra Kumar
                Sain21 but applied it wrongly.



                    43. In Brij Mohan Lal (1)6 a three-Judge Bench of
                this Court, inter alia, considered the Fast Track Courts
                Scheme. In para 10 of the judgment, this Court gave
                various directions. Direction 14 in that paragraph is
                relevant which can be paraphrased as follows: (SCC
                p. 10)


                           (i) No right will be conferred on judicial
                     officers in service for claiming any regular
                     promotion on the basis of his/her appointment
                     on ad hoc basis under the Scheme.



                          (ii) The service rendered in the Fast Track
                     Courts will be deemed as service rendered in the
                     parent cadre.



     25 Jatindra Prasad Das v. State of Orissa, WP (C) No.21449 of 2011, decided on
       15-11-2011 (Ori)
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               75


                          (iii) In case any judicial officer is promoted
                    to higher grade in the parent cadre during his
                    tenure in Fast Track Courts, the service rendered
                    in Fast Track Courts will be deemed to be
                    service in such higher grade.



 
44. The learned Senior Counsel for the writ
               petitioner heavily relied upon the third part of
               Direction 14. As a matter of fact, this part has been
               relied upon in the impugned judgment1 as well. It is
               submitted on behalf of the writ petitioner that on
               promotion to the Senior Branch Cadre of Superior
               Judicial Service during his tenure in the Fast Track
               Courts, the writ petitioner is entitled to the counting
               of the service rendered by him in the Fast Track Court
               as a service in Superior Judicial Service (Senior
               Branch). The submission overlooks the first two parts
               of Direction 14, one, no right will be conferred in
               judicial service for claiming any regular promotion on
               the basis of his/her appointment on ad hoc basis under
               the scheme; and two, the service rendered in Fast
               Track Courts will be deemed as service rendered in
               the parent cadre. In our opinion, until the vacancy
               occurred in the cadre of Superior Judicial Service
               (Senior Branch) which was to be filled up by
               promotion, the service rendered by the writ petitioner
               in the Fast Track Court cannot be deemed to be
               service rendered in the Superior Judicial Service
               (Senior Branch). Rather until then, he continued to be
               a member of the parent cadre i.e. Superior Judicial
               Service (Junior Branch). The third part of Direction
               14, in our view, does not deserve to be read in a
               manner that overrides the 1963 Rules.”


     (B)    In 
V. Venkata Prasad and Others v. High
 Court of A.P. and

     Others17, a Bench of two Judges of this Court considered the case which

     arose in almost identical fact situation.        The claim of the concerned

     Judicial Officer for reckoning the service rendered as Additional District
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.


Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               76


     Judge (Fast Track Courts) on ad-hoc basis was rejected. Reliance was

     placed on the decision of this Court in Debabrata Dash19 and the ratio in

     that decision was followed.



 
(C)    In 
Kum C. Yamini v. The State of Andhra Pradesh
 18 a bench of

     three Judges of this Court considered the issue where the candidates from

     the Bar were appointed on ad-hoc basis and after their consideration, claim

     was raised to reckon their seniority from the date of initial ad-hoc

     appointment. The relevant observations are :-




 
“12. While rejecting the claim for their absorption and
               challenge to the notification issued for the recruitment in
               the regular cadre posts, certain directions were issued in
               
Brij Mohan Lal
 (2) (supra) for considering the claims of ad
               hoc judges appointed to Fast Track Courts into regular
               cadre posts. Following the directions only, the second
               respondent has issued notification inviting applications for
               appointments to the regular cadre of District Judges and
               appellants and others responded to such notification and
               totally 12 of them were selected for regular vacancies. In
               the appointment order dated 02.07.2013 in G.O.MS. No.68
               issued by Law (LA & J-SC.F) Department, they were put
               on probation for a period of two years and after the
               declaration of successful probation and nearly after four
               years of appointment, the present claim is made claiming
               seniority from the date of their initial appointment, as ad
               hoc District Judges.




 
13. The claim of the appellants that they were appointed as
               ad hoc District Judges by following the procedure which is
               similar to the procedure for appointments to the sanctioned
               posts in the regular cadre, is no ground to accede to their
               request to reckon their seniority in the permanent cadre of
               District Judges, from their initial appointment as the
               District Judges for the Fast Track Courts. The appointments
               which came to be made for selecting District Judges for
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                                77


               Fast Track Courts sanctioned under the 11th Finance
               Scheme are totally different and distinct, compared to
               appointments which are to be made for regular vacant posts
               of District Judges covered under A.P. Higher Judicial
               Service. If a person is not appointed to any post in the
               cadre, such person cannot claim any seniority over the
               persons who are appointed in vacant posts in the cadre. The
               Fast Track Courts which were sanctioned initially for five
               years from the grants of 11th Finance Commission, were
               continued in some States beyond such period with the
               assistance, from States and such Fast Track Courts were
               discontinued in some other States. Merely on the ground
               that they were selected by following the same procedure
               akin to that of regular selections, is no ground to consider
               their claim for grant of seniority from the date of initial
               appointment.         When          their      claim        for
               regularisation/absorption and challenge to notification
               issued in the year 2004 for making selections to the vacant
               regular posts of District Judges is rejected by the High
               Court and confirmed by this Court, we are of the view that
               the appellants have no basis to claim seniority from the date
               of initial appointment. In any event, having applied in
               response to the notification issued by the High Court in the
               year 2013 after availing the benefit of appointment, it is not
               open to the appellants to question the conditions imposed in
               the order which is in conformity with rules. Undisputedly,
               appellant was appointed as ad hoc District Judges to
               preside over the Fast Track Courts only. Initially when she
               was not appointed to a post or category of posts, forming
               part of cadre strength in such category, appellant cannot
               claim any seniority over the persons regularly appointed in
               the category of posts forming part of cadre strength. There
               is yet another ground to reject the claim of the appellant.
               Though the appellant claims seniority over the persons who
               are appointed in regular vacant posts forming part of cadre
               strength but they are not even made parties. On this ground
               also, the claim of the appellants deserves rejection.



 
14. We have perused the judgment relied on by the
               appellant party in person, in the case of 
Rudra Kumar Sain
               & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.
 (supra). In the aforesaid
               case, issue relates to claim of seniority between direct
               recruits and promotees. Learned senior counsel Sri
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.


Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                                78


 
Venkataramani, has also relied on the judgments of this
               Court in the case of 
Brij Mohan Lal (1) v. Union of India &
               Ors.
 (supra); in the case of 
Debabrata Dash & Anr. v.
               Jatindra Prasad Das & Ors.
 (supra); in the case of 
V.
               Venkata Prasad & Ors. v. High
 Court of 
Andhra Pradesh &
               Ors.
 (supra) and in the case of 
Brij Mohan Lal (2) v. Union
               of India & Ors.
 (supra). We have looked into the judgments
               
referred above
 by the learned senior counsel Sri
               Venkataramani and the party in person. Having regard to
               issue involved in the present appeals, we are of the view
               that the ratio decided in the aforesaid cases would not
               render any assistance in support of their claim in these
               cases. The claim of seniority will depend upon several
               factors, nature of appointment, rules as per which the
               appointments are made and when appointments are made,
               were such appointments to the cadre posts or not etc. When
               the appellants were not appointed to any regular posts in
               the A.P. Judicial Service, appellants cannot claim seniority
               based on their ad hoc appointments to preside over Fast
               Track Courts. We are of the view that the ratio decided in
               the said judgments relied on by the appellants would not
               render any assistance in support of their case.




 
15. On the other hand, the judgment in the case of 
V.
               Venkata Prasad & Ors. v. High
 Court of 
Andhra Pradesh &
               Ors.
 (supra), this Court has, in clear terms, while
               considering A.P. State Higher Judicial Service Special
               Rules for Ad Hoc Appointments, 2001 held that such
               appointments in respect of Fast Track Courts are ad hoc in
               nature and no right accrues to such appointees. The
               aforesaid view of this Court clearly supports the case of the
               respondents. Paragraph 25 of the said case which is
               relevant for the purpose of these cases reads as under : “25.
               From the aforesaid two authorities, it is quite clear that the
               appointments in respect of Fast Track Courts are ad hoc in
               nature and no right is to accrue to such recruits
               promoted/posted on ad hoc basis from the lower judiciary
               for the regular promotion on the basis of such appointment.
               It has been categorically stated that FTC Judges were
               appointed under a separate set of rules than the rules
               governing the regular appointment in the State Higher
               Judicial Services.”
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.


Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               79


            The decisions in Debabrata Dash16, and V. Venkata Prasad17 were

     in the context where serving Judicial Officers were granted ad-hoc

     promotions as Fast Track Court Judges, while in C. Yamini18 the members

     of the Bar were appointed as Fast Track Court Judges and these decisions

     thus completely conclude the issue. As has been held in said decisions, the

     reckonable date has to be the date when substantive appointment is made

     and not from the date of the initial ad-hoc appointment or promotion.



     Question (A) is, therefore, answered in the negative.



 
40.    As regards Question No.(B), it is relevant to note that the

     Notification dated 15.04.2010 had invited application for filling up 36

     vacancies by Direct Recruitments and 22 vacancies by Promotion through

     LCE. This was preceded by determination of vacancies through

     Notification dated 31.03.2010. After the process initiated in terms of said

     Notification dated 15.04.2010 was cancelled, a fresh determination of the

     vacancies was undertaken and the Notification dated 31.03.2011 now

     found vacancies for Direct Recruitments, for Promotion through LCE and

     for Regular Promotion at 37, 32 and 24 respectively. Thus, the vacancies

     which became available post the Notification dated 15.04.2010 were also

     taken into account. The Report dated 15.03.2019 shows that some of the

     selected candidates in the process pursuant to the Notification dated
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               80


     31.03.2011 had not even participated in the earlier process of 2010. In the

     premises, if the submission that the process initiated under the Notification

     dated 31.03.2011 must be held to be in continuation of the earlier selection

     of 2010 is accepted, it would amount to conferring undue advantages upon

     persons who either had not participated in the process of 2010 or who were

     not even eligible in 2010. The Report dated 15.03.2019, therefore,

     correctly appreciated the fact situation on record and concluded that it

     would not be in continuation of the earlier process.



 
41.    As regards Question No.(C), it must be noted that as on the date

     when 2010 Rules came into effect, the Additional District and Sessions

     Judges manning the Fast Track Courts had rendered service in ad-hoc

     capacity for almost 07 years. The question whether they be granted

     promotion on Regular Basis was subject matter of consideration of the

     High Court. The Report of the Committee of Judges given in 2008 had

     advised that they be granted Regular Promotion and the matter was getting

     deferred at the level of the Full Court. It was at this stage that 2010 Rules

     became effective from 18.01.2010. Even thereafter, the Notification dated

     31.03.2010 had published the vacancy situation only in respect of Direct

     Recruitment and Promotion through LCE. It was obviously so, as the issue

     regarding grant of Regular Promotion on substantive basis to those Fast
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               81


 
Track Court Judges was simultaneously under consideration and on

     21.04.2010 a formal Order was passed promoting the 47 Judicial Officers

     on substantive basis to the Cadre of District Judge. The grant of promotion

     to the 47 Judicial Officers and selection process pursuant to the

     Notification dated 15.04.2010 were not part of the same process and were

     completely independent. None of the 47 Judicial Officers had the occasion

     to compete in the LCE that was undertaken in terms of the Notification

     dated 15.04.2010. It is possible to say that the last of the 47 Judicial

     Officers could as well have been the first in the list of successful

     candidates through LCE and thus could possibly have been entitled to

     better placement. In any case, the process initiated pursuant to the

     Notification dated 15.04.2010 was cancelled for administrative reasons and

     the appointments in respect of process pursuant to the Notification dated

     31.03.2011 could be effected only in the year 2013, i.e. more than 03 years

     after the 47 Judicial Officers were granted substantive appointment to the

     Cadre of District Judge. Further, if grant of promotion to the 47 Judicial

     Officers is taken to be the part of the same process, some of the Direct

     Recruits may not even be having eligibility in the year 2010 and yet may

     be placed above some of the 47 Judicial Officers. In the circumstances, the

     assessment made by the High Court in its Report dated 15.03.2019 is
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               82


     without any infirmity and we have no hesitation in concluding that the

     substantive promotion granted to the 47 Judicial Officers cannot be taken

     to be part of the same selection process where Direct Recruits and

     candidates through LCE were appointed to the Cadre of District Judge on

     15.07.2013.



          If the substantive appointment of the 47 Judicial Officers to the Cadre

     of District Judge is separate and distinct from the selection process through

     which appointment were made after three years on 15.07.2017, there

     would be no question or occasion to apply the Cyclic Order. It is not the

     contention of anyone that appointment of the 47 Judicial Officers on the

     relevant date was either beyond the quota meant for Regular Promotion or

     that there was any serious infirmity in the process or that any of the

     candidates was completely ineligible. Since there was a difference of more

     than 03 years between these two modes of selection, the Report dated

     15.03.2019 rightly concluded that the Cyclic Order ought not to get

     attracted.



 
It is true that the Cyclic Order and the quota for different streams

     ensure equitable treatment for three sources. However, the application of

     the Cyclic Order must depend upon the fact situations. It was precisely for

     this reason that the expression “as far as possible” has been used in the
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               83


     Rule. Other things being equal, certainly the quotas for different streams

     and the Cyclic Order must be adhered to. However, if such adherence itself

     is going to cause incongruous situation and inflict incalculable harm,

     insistence upon applicability of the Cyclic Order in such cases may not be

     appropriate. The expression “as far as possible” was, therefore, relied

     upon by this Court in Para 34 of its decision in Veena Verma12. It would

     also be instructive to refer to a decision of this Court in State of M.P. v.



     Narmada Bachao Andolan and Another26, where the expression “as far as

     possible” was explained:-



                 ““As far as possible”

                     38. The aforesaid phrase provides for flexibility,
                 clothing the authority concerned with powers to meet
                 special situations where the normal process of
                 resolution cannot flow smoothly. The aforesaid phrase
                 can be interpreted as not being prohibitory in nature.

 
The said words rather connote a discretion vested in
                 the prescribed authority. It is thus discretion and not
                 compulsion. There is no hard-and-fast rule in this
                 regard as these words give a discretion to the
                 authority concerned. Once the authority exercises its
                 discretion, the court should not interfere with the said
                 discretion/decision unless it is found to be palpably
                 arbitrary. (
Vide Iridium India Telecom Ltd. v.
                 Motorola Inc.27
 and High Court of Judicature for
                 
Rajasthan v. Veena Verma12
.) Thus, it is evident that
                 this phrase simply means that the principles are to be
                 observed unless it is not possible to follow the same
                 in the particular circumstances of a case.”



     26   (2011) 7 SCC 639
     27   (2005) 2 SCC 145
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.


Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               84


     41.1.   We must at this stage deal with submissions based on the decision

     of this Court in N.R. Parmar19. In that case a Bench of two Judges of this

     Court while considering O.N. dated 20.12.1999 and 02.02.2000 had

     concluded as under:-



                   “31.2. It is not necessary, that the direct recruits
               for vacancies of a particular recruitment year, should
               join within the recruitment year (during which the
               vacancies had arisen) itself. As such, the date of
               joining would not be a relevant factor for determining
               seniority of direct recruits. It would suffice if action
               has been initiated for direct recruit vacancies, within
               the recruitment year in which the vacancies had
               become available. This is so, because delay in
               administrative action, it was felt, could not deprive an
               individual of his due seniority. As such, initiation of
               action for recruitment within the recruitment year
               would be sufficient to assign seniority to the
               appointees concerned in terms of the “rotation of
               quotas” principle, so as to arrange them with other
               appointees (from the alternative source), for vacancies
               of the same recruitment year.

 
…

                   34.1. If the process of recruitment has been
               initiated during the recruitment year (in which the
               vacancies have arisen) itself, even if the examination
               for the said recruitment is held in a subsequent year,
               and the result is declared in a year later (than the one
               in which the examination was held), and the selected
               candidates joined in a further later year (than the one
               in which the result was declared), the selected
               candidates will be entitled to be assigned seniority,
               with reference to the recruitment year (in which the
               requisition of vacancies was made). The logic and
               reasoning for the aforesaid conclusion (expressed in
               the ON dated 2-2-2000) is, if the process of direct
               recruitment is initiated in the recruitment year itself,
               the selected candidate(s) cannot be blamed for the
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               85


                administrative delay, in completing the process of
                selection.”


              Relying on the aforementioned observations, it was submitted that

     the candidates selected through Direct Recruitment and LCE on

     15.07.2013 could not be prejudiced if the High Court on the administrative

     side had segregated the issue of promotion of the 47 Judicial Officers on

     one hand and the selection through Direct Recruitment and LCE on the

     other; and the time lag of three years between the appointments would,

     therefore, be of no consequence.



              The decision in N.R. Parmar19 was thereafter relied upon by

     another Bench of two Judges of this Court in Hon’ble Punjab and

     Haryana High Court v. State of Punjab and others28. In that case, the

     recruitment from three different sources to the cadre of District Judge was

     done on three different dates but in the same year. Paragraphs 50 to 53 of

     said decision may be extracted as under:-



 
50. At this juncture, one of the submissions, which
                has been emphatically pressed by the learned Counsel
                for the promotees is that for determination of
                seniority, continuous length of service is
                determinative. The direct recruits and out of turn
                promotees, who were not even born in the cadre when
                promotees were promoted, they have to take seniority
                after the promotees. In this reference, it is useful to

     28   (2019) 12 SCC 496
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               86


 
refer to a judgment of this Court in 
Union of India and
               Ors. v. N.R. Parmar and Ors.
 (2012) 13 SCC 340, the
               issue in the said case was also an issue of
               determination of seniority between direct recruits vis-
               à-vis promotees and quota and rota principles. This
               Court had occasion to consider the office
               memorandum issued by the Government dated
               22.12.1959. Noticing Para 6 of above office
               memorandum following was stated in Para 23 of the
               judgment:




 
23. The General Principles for determining seniority
               in the Central Services are shown to have been 
laid
               down in
 an annexure to an Office Memorandum dated
               22-12-1959 issued by the Government of India,
               Ministry of Home Affairs (hereinafter referred to as
               "the OM dated 22-12-1959"). Para 6 of the annexure
,
               
referred to above
, laid down the manner of
               determining inter se seniority between direct recruits
               and promotees. Para 6 is being extracted hereunder:




                    6. Relative seniority of direct recruits and
                    promotees.--The relative seniority of direct
                    recruits and of promotees shall be determined
                    according to the rotation of vacancies between
                    direct recruits and promotees which shall be
                    based on the quotas of vacancies reserved for
                    direct recruitment and promotion respectively in
                    the Department Rules.



                    It is apparent from the above extract of the OM
               dated 22-12-1959, that the "quota" between
               promotees and direct recruits was to be read into the
               seniority rule. The OM also provided for a definite
               rotation of seniority points ("rota") between
               promotees and direct recruits. The rotation provided
               for was founded on the concept of rotation of quotas
               between promo-tees and direct recruits. It is therefore
               apparent, that under the OM dated 22-12-1959 inter se
               seniority between the promotees and direct recruits
               was based on the "quota" and "rota" principle. The
               same has been meaningfully described as "rotation of
               quotas" in some of these instruments.

 
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               87


               51. There was further office memorandum on
               07.02.1986 to take care of situation where it was
               decided that in future, while the principle of rotation
               of quotas will still be followed for determining the
               inter-se seniority of direct recruits and promotees, the
               present practice of keeping vacant slots for being
               filled up by direct recruits of later years, thereby
               giving them unintended seniority over promotees who
               were already in position, would be dispensed with.
               This Court noticed office memorandum dated
               07.02.1986 and observed that "when direct recruits or
               promotees      become      available     through   later
               examinations or selections", it clearly mean that the
               situation contemplated is one where, there has been an
               earlier examination or selection, and is then followed
               by a "later" examination or selection.



               52. In the above context, this Court laid down
               following in Paragraph 31.2 that "it is not necessary,
               that the direct recruits of a particular recruitment year,
               should join within the recruitment year itself". It was
               held that date of joining would not be a relevant factor
               for determining seniority of direct recruits. In
               paragraph 31.2 and 34.1 following has been laid
               down:



                   31.2. It is not necessary, that the direct recruits for
                   vacancies of a particular recruitment year, should
                   join within the recruitment year (during which the
                   vacancies had arisen) itself. As such, the date of
                   joining would not be a relevant factor for
                   determining seniority of direct recruits. It would
                   suffice if action has been initiated for direct
                   recruit vacancies, within the recruitment year in
                   which the vacancies had become available. This
                   is so, because delay in administrative action, it
                   was felt, could not deprive an individual of his
                   due seniority. As such, initiation of action for
                   recruitment within the recruitment year would be
                   sufficient to assign seniority to the appointees
                   concerned in terms of the "rotation of quotas"

 
principle, so as to arrange them with other
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               88


                   appointees (from the alternative source), for
                   vacancies of the same recruitment year.



                   34.1. If the process of recruitment has been
                   initiated during the recruitment year (in which the
                   vacancies have arisen) itself, even if the
                   examination for the said recruitment is held in a
                   subsequent year, and the result is declared in a
                   year later (than the one in which the examination
                   was held), and the selected candidates joined in a
                   further later year (than the one in which the result
                   was declared), the selected candidates will be
                   entitled to be assigned seniority, with reference to
                   the recruitment year (in which the requisition of
                   vacancies was made). The logic and reasoning for
                   the aforesaid conclusion (expressed in the ON
                   dated 2-2-2000) is, if the process of direct
                   recruitment is initiated in the recruitment year
                   itself, the selected candidate(s) cannot be blamed
                   for the administrative delay, in completing the
                   process of selection.



 
53. In the present case, process for all the three
               streams was completed in the year 2008 and all the
               officers of three streams had joined in the same year.
               The submission that quota rota Rule was broken or
               seniority will be affected because of joining of one
               category of officers earlier cannot be accepted. It is
               also relevant to notice that purpose of statutory Rules
               and laying down a procedure for recruitment was to
               achieve the certainty. Officers belonging to different
               streams have to be confidant that they shall be
               recruited under their quota and get seniority as per
               their quota and roster. In event, the seniority is to be
               fixed with date of joining of particular stream, it will
               lead to uncertainty and making seniority depending on
               administrative authorities, which is neither in the
               interest of service nor serve the cause of justice. We,
               thus, conclude that roster is fully applicable for
               determination of seniority. Officers of different
               streams selected in a particular year even though they
               were allowed to join the post on different dates shall
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               89


 
not affect their inter se seniority, which is to be
                 decided on the basis of roster.”


     41.2      It must, however, be stated that the decision in N.K. Parmar19 has

     since then been overruled by a Bench of three Judges of this Court in 
K.

     Meghachandra Singh and Ors. vs. Ningam Siro and Others
 29.              The

     relevant paragraphs of said decision are as under:




                 5. Before the Writ Court, the promotees contended
                 that they entered the MPS Grade II Cadre on
                 01.03.2007 whereas the private Respondent Nos. 3 to
                 33 were appointed subsequently (on 14.08.2007 and
                 24.11.2007 respectively) and, therefore, they should
                 be regarded as senior to the direct recruits.



                 6. The direct recruits on the other hand claimed
                 seniority over the promotees by contending that
                 seniority has to be decided in accordance with the
                 year of the vacancy and not by the fortuitous date on
                 which, the appointment could be finalized for the
                 direct recruits.

                                            …


                 13. It was also made clear that the promotees will
                 naturally have seniority over the Appellants as they
                 had entered the cadre of MPS Grade II, before the
                 Writ Appellants were borne in the cadre.

                                          …


 
17. The Senior Counsel cites 
Union of India and Ors.
                 v. N.R. Parmar
, (2012)13 SCC 340, to argue that
                 when action was initiated for filling up the 2005
                 vacancies, the administrative delay in finalization of
                 the recruitment leading to delayed appointment
                 should not deprive the individual of his due seniority.
                 By referring to the rotation of quota principle, the
                 counsel argues that initiation of action for recruitment

      29    (2019) SCC Online SC 1494
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.


Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               90


               in the year of the vacancy would be sufficient, to
               assign seniority from that year.

                                            …


               20. Representing the Respondents/promotees, the
               learned Senior Counsel, Shri Jaideep Gupta refers to
               the MPS Rules, 1965 to argue that the provisions of
               the Rules make it abundantly clear that inter-se
               seniority in the cadre of MPS Grade-III is to be
               determined by the order in which appointments are
               made to the service. The counsel pointedly refers to
               Rules 28 (i) where it is specified that the .......
               seniority in the service shall be determined by the
               order in which appointments are made to the
               service....... He also refers to the later part of Rule
               28(iii), where again it is specified that the "seniority
               of the officer...... shall be counted from the date,
               he/she is appointed to the service............ . The
               provisions in Rule 16(iii) are pressed home by Mr.
               Gupta to argue that only when the person is
               appointed, he shall be deemed to have been appointed
               to the service from the date of encadrement.



 
21. The judgment in 
N.R. Parmar
 (Supra) is read with
               equal emphasis by Mr. Gupta to firstly point out that
               this case does not lay down the correct law in
               determination of seniority. The counsel highlights the
               incongruity in a situation where a person who entered
               service later will claim seniority above those who
               joined service at an earlier point of time.
 
The
               applicability of the ratio in 
N.R. Parmar
 (Supra) to the
               litigants in the present case is also questioned by Mr.
               Gupta by pointing out that the provisions of MPS
               Rules, 1965 applicable for the officers in the Manipur
               Police Officers, was not the subject of consideration
               in 
N.R. Parmar
 (Supra), and, therefore, the said ratio
               relatable to Income Tax Inspectors, with different
               Service Rules, will not apply to the present case.


                                           …


 
29. Before proceeding to deal with the contention of
               the Appellants' Counsel vis-à-vis the judgment in
               
N.R. Parmar
 (Supra), it is necessary to observe that
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.


Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               91


 
the Law is fairly well settled in a series of cases, that a
                person is disentitled to claim seniority from a date he
                was not borne in service. For example, in 
J.C. Patnaik

                (Supra)30 the Court considered the question whether
                the year in which the vacancy accrues can have any
                bearing for the purpose of determining the seniority
                irrespective of the fact when the person is actually
                recruited. The Court observed that there could be time
                lag between the year when the vacancy accrues and
                the year when the final recruitment is made.
 
Referring
                to the word "recruited" occurring in the Orissa Service
                of Engineers Rules, 1941 the Supreme Court held in
                
J.C. Patnaik
 (Supra) that person cannot be said to
                have been recruited to the service only on the basis of
                initiation of process of recruitment but he is borne in
                the post only when, formal appointment order is
                issued.




 
30. The above ratio in 
J.C. Patnaik
 (Supra) is
                followed by this Court in several subsequent cases.
 
It
                would however be appropriate to make specific
                reference considering the seniority dispute in
                reference to the Arunachal Pradesh Rules which are
                pari materia to the MPS Rules, 1965, (vide (
2007) 15
                SCC 406-Nani Sha and Ors. v. State of Arunachal
                Pradesh and Ors.
). Having regard to the similar
                provisions, the Court approved the view that seniority
                is to be reckoned not from the date when vacancy
                arose but from the date on which the appointment is
                made to the post. The Court particularly held that
                retrospective seniority should not be granted from a
                day when an employee is not even borne in the cadre
                so as to adversely impact those who were validly
                appointed in the meantime.




 
31. We may also benefit by referring to the Judgment
                in 
State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors. v. Ashok Kumar
                Srivastava and Anr.
 (2014) 14 SCC 720.
 
This
                judgment is significant since this is rendered after the
                
N.R. Parmar
 (Supra) decision.
 
Here the Court
                approved the ratio in 
Pawan Pratap Singh and Ors. v.
                Reevan Singh and Ors.
 (2011) 3 SCC 267, and
     30   (1998) 4 SCC 456
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.


Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               92


 
concurred with the view that seniority should not be
               reckoned retrospectively unless it is so expressly
               provided by the relevant service Rules. The Supreme
               Court held that seniority cannot be given for an
               employee who is yet to be borne in the cadre and by
               doing so it may adversely affect the employees who
               have been appointed validly in the meantime. The law
               so declared in 
Ashok Kumar Srivastava
 (supra) being
               the one appealing to us, is profitably extracted as
               follows:




 
24. The learned Senior Counsel for the Appellants
                   has drawn inspiration from the recent authority in
                   
Pawan Pratap Singh v. Reevan Singh
 where the
                   Court after referring to earlier authorities in the
                   field has culled out certain principles out of
                   which the following being the relevant are
                   produced below:




                    45. (ii) Inter se seniority in a particular service
                    has to be determined as per the service rules.

                    The date of entry in a particular service or the
                    date of substantive appointment is the safest
                    criterion for fixing seniority inter se between
                    one officer or the other or between one group of
                    officers and the other recruited from different
                    sources. Any departure therefrom in the
                    statutory rules, executive instructions or
                    otherwise must be consistent with the
                    requirements of 
Articles 14
 and 
16
 of the
                    Constitution.

                         .....................

                    45. (iv) The seniority cannot be reckoned from
                    the date of occurrence of the vacancy and cannot
                    be given retrospectively unless it is so expressly
                    provided by the relevant service rules. It is so
                    because seniority cannot be given on
                    retrospective basis when an employee has not
                    even been borne in the cadre and by doing so it
                    may adversely affect the employees who have
                    been appointed validly in the meantime.

 
…
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               93


               34. In the above context, it is also necessary to refer to
               the relevant advertisement issued in 2005 for direct
               recruitment which allowed the aspirants to apply even
               if, their result in the qualification examination is
               awaited. Even more intriguing and significant is the
               relaxation that those proposing to appear in the
               qualifying examination are also allowed to respond to
               the advertisement. If such be the nature of the process
               initiated (in the year 2005) for making direct
               recruitment, we can easily visualize a situation where,
               in the event of granting seniority from the stage of
               commencing the process, a person when eventually
               appointed, would get seniority from a date even
               before obtaining the qualification, for holding the
               post.

                                          …


 
38. When we carefully read the judgment in 
N.R.
               Parmar
 (Supra), it appears to us that the referred OMs
               (dated 07.02.1986 and 03.07.1986) were not properly
               construed in the judgment. Contrary to the eventual
               finding, the said two OMs had made it clear that
               seniority of the direct recruits be declared only from
               the date of appointment and not from the date of
               initiation of recruitment process. But surprisingly, the
               judgment while referring to the illustration given in
               the OM in fact overlooks the effect of the said
               illustration.
 
According to us, the illustration extracted
               in the 
N.R. Parmar
 (Supra) itself, makes it clear that
               the vacancies which were intended for direct
               recruitment in a particular year (1986) which were
               filled in the next year (1987) could be taken into
               consideration only in the subsequent year's seniority
               list but not in the seniority list of 1986. In fact, this
               was indicated in the two OMs dated 07.02.1986 and
               03.07.1986 and that is why the Government issued the
               subsequent OM on 03.03.2008 by way of clarification
               of the two earlier OMs.




 
39. At this stage, we must also emphasize that the
               Court in 
N.R. Parmar
 (Supra) need not have observed
               that the selected candidate cannot be blamed for
               administrative delay and the gap between initiation of
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.


Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               94


               process and appointment. Such observation is
               fallacious in as much as none can be identified as
               being a selected candidate on the date when the
               process of recruitment had commenced. On that day, a
               body of persons aspiring to be appointed to the
               vacancy intended for direct recruits was not in
               existence. The persons who might respond to an
               advertisement cannot have any service-related rights,
               not to talk of right to have their seniority counted
               from the date of the advertisement. 
In other words,
               only on completion of the process, the Applicant
               morphs into a selected candidate and, therefore,
               unnecessary observation was made in 
N.R. Parmar

               (Supra) to the effect that the selected candidate cannot
               be blamed for the administrative delay.
 
In the same
               context, we may usefully refer to the ratio in
               
Shankarsan Dash v. Union of India
 (1991) 3 SCC 47,
               where it was held even upon empanelment, an
               appointee does not acquire any right.




 
40. The Judgment in 
N.R. Parmar
 (Supra) relating to
               the Central Government employees cannot in our
               opinion, automatically apply to the Manipur State
               Police Officers, governed by the MPS Rules, 1965.


We also feel that 
N.R. Parmar
 (Supra) had incorrectly
               distinguished      the      long-standing      seniority
               determination principles propounded in, inter-alia,
               
J.C. Patnaik
 (Supra), Suraj Prakash Gupta and Ors. v.
               State of J&K and Ors. (2000) 7 SCC 561 and Pawan
               Pratap Singh and Ors. v. Reevan Singh and Ors.
               (Supra). These three judgments and several others
               with like enunciation on the law for determination of
               seniority makes it abundantly clear that under Service
               Jurisprudence, seniority cannot be claimed from a
               date when the incumbent is yet to be borne in the
               cadre.
 
In our considered opinion, the law on the issue
               is correctly declared in 
J.C. Patnaik
 (Supra) and
               consequently we disapprove the norms on assessment
               of inter-se seniority, suggested in 
N.R. Parmar

               (Supra). Accordingly, the decision in N.R. Parmar is
               overruled. However, it is made clear that this decision
               will not affect the inter-se seniority already based on
               N.R. Parmar and the same is protected. This decision
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.


Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               95


               will apply prospectively except where seniority is to
               be fixed under the relevant Rules from the date of
               vacancy/the date of advertisement.



               41. As noted earlier, the Learned Single Judge based
               his judgment on two propositions but the Division
               Bench was of the view that result would be the same
               merely on the basis of one of the two propositions
               and, therefore, it was unnecessary to pronounce upon
               the other proposition. Such an approach cannot
               therefore be described as a conflict (as has been
               suggested), between the two judgments. Both
               Benches were absolutely consistent in their
               conclusion that promotees would have to be given
               seniority over direct recruits. It cannot therefore be
               argued that by some convoluted reasoning, it is
               possible to come to the conclusion that the orders
               passed by the two Courts would result in
               diametrically opposite situation namely, that direct
               recruits would have to be given seniority over
               promotees.”


     41.3   The facts noted in paragraph 5 of the decision in Meghachandra

     Singh29 show that the promotees entered the relevant grade in March 2007

     whereas the direct recruits were appointed in August and November 2007.



     While overruling the decision in Parmar19 it was also observed in

     paragraph 40 that in Service Jurisprudence, seniority cannot be claimed

     where the incumbent is yet to be borne in the cadre.



 
41.4   In the premises, the conclusion is inescapable that the candidates

     selected through LCE and Direct Recruitment vide Order dated

     15.07.2013 cannot claim to be clubbed with the 47 Judicial Officers
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               96


     promoted in substantive capacity on 21.04.2010 and cannot claim

     appropriate placement in accordance with the Cyclic Order.               We

     accordingly answer Question (C) and find that the 47 Judicial Officers

     were rightly placed en-bloc senior to all the candidates selected through

     the process     initiated   pursuant to the Notification dated 31.03.2011.



     Writ Petition (Civil) Nos.936 of 2018 and 967 are, therefore, dismissed.



     42.     While considering Question (D), it is relevant to notice the

     emphasis placed by this Court in All India Judges Association1 while

     directing that 25 per cent of the posts in the cadre of the District Judge be

     filled through LCE. It was stated in paragraph 27 that there should be an

     incentive amongst relatively junior and other officers to improve and to

     compete with each other so as to excel and get accelerated promotion. In

     paragraph 28 the relevant direction again stressed that 25 per cent quota

     for promotion through LCE be “strictly on the basis of merit.”


             Rule 31(2) of 2010 Rules also uses the expression “strictly on the

     basis of merit” while dealing with posts to be filled in through LCE. The

     merit is to be assessed in terms of the scheme 
laid down in
 the relevant

     Schedule. After considering various parameters stated in said Schedule,

     the successful candidates are selected on the basis of merit.    The list of
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               97


     successful candidates becomes the basis for final selection subject to

     qualifying parameters such as suitability, medical fitness etc.


             However, placing reliance on Rule 47(4), the Committee in its

     Report dated 15.03.2019 held that the inter se seniority of persons

     promoted to the District Judge Cadre in the same year ought to be the

     same as it was in the posts held by them at the time of promotion.



             If the list is to be drawn up according to merit, it is possible that

     the last person in the list of selectees may be the senior most and going by

     the Report of the Committee, if all the selectees are promoted in the same

     year such last person may as well be at the top of the list of promotees

     through LCE. In that event, the seniority shall become the governing

     criteria and the excellence on part of a comparatively junior candidate

     may recede in the background.            Instead of giving incentive to

     comparatively junior and other officers, the entire examination process

     will stand reduced to a mere qualifying examination rather than a

     competitive examination affording opportunity to meritorious candidates.



     The criteria shall then become seniority subject to passing the LCE.



 
The direction issued in All India Judges Association1 to afford an

     incentive to meritorious candidates regardless of their seniority would not
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               98


     thus be carried out. The general principle appearing in Rule 47(4) must,

     therefore, give way to the special dispensation in Rule 31(2) of 2010

     Rules.



              In our view, the High Court in its Report dated 15.03.2019

     completely failed to appreciate the true character of LCE and reservation

     of certain quota for that category.



              We, therefore, accept the submissions made by the learned

     Advocate for the petitioners in Writ Petition (Civil) No.498 of 2018 and

     Diary No.13252 of 2019 and while answering Question (D) declare that

     the inter se placement of the candidates selected through LCE must be

     based on merit and not on the basis of the seniority in the erstwhile cadre.



     Said Writ Petitions are allowed to that extent.



     43.      We now deal with the submissions advanced in Writ Petition

     (Civil) Nos.464 of 2019 and 899 of 2019 and other similar matters.



 
It is true that as on the date when 2010 Rules came into effect,

     there were 83 Fast Track Courts functioning in the State and appropriate

     mention to that effect was made in Part A of Schedule II to 2010 Rules. It

     is also correct to say that the ad-hoc promotions granted to the concerned

     Judicial Officers were under 1969 Rules. But such promotions were on
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                               99


     ad-hoc basis to man the Fast Track Courts and the law on the point is now

     well settled that the service rendered by such Judicial Officers as Fast

     Track Court Judges on ad-hoc basis cannot be taken into account while

     reckoning seniority after such Judicial Officers were granted promotion

     on substantive basis and that their seniority has to be reckoned only from

     the date of their substantive appointment to the cadre of District Judge.



     Said 1969 Rules do not in any way confer any right which would be

     inconsistent with the law so 
laid down by
 this Court.



             The further submission that four Judicial Officers out of the 47

     Judicial Officers were also appointed on the same day along with the

     petitioners in Writ Petition (Civil) No.464 of 2019 also has no merit. The

     grant of promotion on substantive basis to said four Judicial Officers does

     not by itself entitle said petitioners to any similar treatment. The issue of

     grant of promotion on substantive basis may depend upon various issues

     including suitability of the concerned candidate and availability of posts.



 
The record also shows that after grant of promotion on substantive basis

     to the 47 Judicial Officers, there were no vacancies for Regular Promotion

     which is why the selection process undertaken in the year 2010 did not

     earmark any vacancies for Regular Promotions and it was only in the year

     2011, when adequate vacancies for said category became available, that
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                          100


     the Notification dated 31.03.2011 contemplated filling up of certain

     vacancies by Regulation Promotion.



             The petitioners in Writ Petition (Civil) No.464 of 2019

     participated in the process initiated pursuant to said Notification dated

     31.03.2011. Some of them also appeared in LCE and availed of the

     opportunity to stake their claim. Their regular promotions to the Cadre of

     District Judge must, therefore, be taken only as a result of selection

     process initiated in terms of the Notification dated 31.03.2011 which

     culminated in the Order dated 15.07.2013. In the circumstances, their

     substantive appointment to said cadre has to be reckoned from 15.07.2013

     and not with any anterior effect.



             Once the Regular Promotion was part of the same process along

     with other streams, namely, through Direct Recruitment and LCE, the

     Cyclic Order had to be applied and said petitioners cannot be given en-



     bloc placement above the candidates selected through Direct Recruitment

     and LCE in the same process of selection.



             We, therefore, see no merit in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 464 of

     2019 and said Writ Petition is dismissed.

 
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                            101


            The petitioners in Writ Petition (Civil) No.899 of 2019 and other

     connected matters came to be appointed on ad-hoc basis to man the Fast

     Track Courts after 2010 Rules came into effect. Even if their services

     were continued after abolition of Fast Track Courts, that by itself would

     not confer any right on them. They came to be substantively promoted to

     the Cadre of District Judge only vide Order dated 05.02.2016. For the

     reasons stated hereinabove, their entitlement on substantive basis has to be

     reckoned only from 05.02.2016 and not from any earlier date.           Writ

     Petition (Civil) No.899 of 2019 and other connected matters are,

     therefore, dismissed. Thus, while answering Question (E), we conclude

     that the Report dated 15.03.2019 does not call for any modification,

     except to the extent dealt with in answer to Question (D).



     44.    Concluding thus, we direct:-



            (a) Writ Petition (Civil) No.498 of 2018 and Writ Petition (Civil)

            _______ of 2020 [D. No.13252 of 2019] are allowed to the extent

            indicated above.



 
(b) Consequently, the seniority list issued in terms of Report dated

            15.03.2019 shall stand modified only to the extent that appropriate

            placement to the candidates selected through LCE be given on the
Writ Petition (Civil) No.936 of 2018 etc etc.

Dinesh Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Hon. High
 Court for Judicature of Rajasthan and
Anr.




                                                                            102


            basis of their merit in the examination and not on the basis of their

            seniority in the erstwhile cadre. Let the appropriate changes be

            made within four weeks of this Judgment.



            (c) Except to the extent indicated in direction (b) above, the

            Report dated 15.03.2019 does not call for any modification or

            clarification.



            (d) All other writ petitions are dismissed.



                                                          ……………………….J.
                                                            [Uday Umesh Lalit]



                                                          ……………………….J.
                                                              [Vineet Saran]
     New Delhi;

     April 29, 2020.


