



[Cites 
13
, Cited by 
0
]




Chattisgarh High Court


Smt.Shalini Dalela vs State Of Chhattisgarh And Ors on 12 July, 2024


     Neutral Citation
     2024:CGHC:25017
                                       1




                                                                         NAFR
                 HIGH COURT OF CHHATTISGARH, BILASPUR
                            WPS No. 966 of 2014
        Smt.Shalini Dalela W/o Prashant Shrivastava Aged About 43 Years
        Working As Project Officer, Woman And Child Development
        Department, Training Centre, Bilaspur, R/o L-3, Vidhya Nagar,
        Bilaspur P.S. Tarbahar, Distt. Bilaspur C.G., Chhattisgarh
                                                                ---- Petitioner
                                    Versus
     1. State Of ChhattisgarhThrough Secretary, Department Of Woman
        And Child Development, Mahanadi Bhawan, P.S. Rakhi, Distt.
        Raipur C.G., Chhattisgarh
     2. Commissioner Director Department Of Woman And Child
        Development, Directorate, Indrawati Bhawan, P.S. Rakhi, Distt.
        Raipur C.G., District : Raipur, Chhattisgarh
     3. Deputy Director Establishment, Director Department Of Woman
        And Child Development, Directorate, Indrawati Bhawan, P.S.
        Rakhi, Distt. Raipur C.G., District : Raipur, Chhattisgarh
     4. Public Service Commission, C.G. Through Its Secretary, Raipur,
        Distt. Raipur C.G., District : Raipur, Chhattisgarh
     5. Anand Kumar Tiwari S/o G.N. Tiwari Aged About 45 Years Working
        As Assistant Director, Department Of Woman And Child
        Development, Directorate Raipur, Distt. Raipur C.G., District :
        Raipur, Chhattisgarh
     6. Abhay Dewangan S/o Shri Dewangan Aged About 47 Years
        Posted As Assistant Director, Department Of Woman And Child
        Development, Directorate Raipur, Distt. Raipur C.G., District :
        Raipur, Chhattisgarh
                                                           ---- Respondents


                 (Cause-title taken from Case Information System)

For Petitioner             :     Mr. Sourabh Sahu, Advocate
For State                  :     Mr. Satish Gupta, G.A. along with
                                 Ms. Nupoor Sonkar, Panel Lawyer
For Respondent No.4        :     Mr. Anuroop Panda, Advocate



                Hon'ble Shri Justice Rakesh Mohan Pandey
                               Order on Board
12.07.2024
       Heard.



1.     The petitioner has filed this petition seeking the following relief(s):-

      Neutral Citation
     2024:CGHC:25017                   -2-





              "10.1 That, the Hon'ble Court may kindly be
              pleased to :

              (a) direct the respondent/State to end the probation
              of the petitioner w.e.f. 04.05.1998.

              (b) That the respondent/state may kindly be
              directed to consider the case of promotion of the
              petitioner on the post of Assistant Director Mahila
              Avam Bal Vikas w.e.f. the date of respondent No.5
              was promoted on that post in the year 2005 and
              accordingly to fix the seniority and place of the
              petitioner in the gradation list of Assistant Directors,
              and to grant her further promotions accordingly.

              (c) In the alternative respondent No.1-4 may kindly
              be directed to grant promotion to the petitioner at
              par and from the same date from which respondent
              No.6 Abhay Dewangan has been granted
              promotion on the post of Assistant Director in 2013
              w.e.f. 08.07.2013 and to fix her seniority on the
              post of Assistant Director accordingly.

              10.2 Any other relief which this Hon'ble Court
              deems fit under the facts and circumstances of the
              case including the cost of the petition.

              10.3 That, this Hon'ble Court may kindly be
              pleased to issue appropriate writ/order to quash
              the order dated 24.09.2014, bearing No.F-1-
              33/2007/MBAVI/50, passed by respondent No.1"



2.     The facts of the present case are that the petitioner was appointed

to the post of Project Officer in Mahila Avam Bal Vikas Vibhag on

23.04.1996. She joined her services on 04.05.1996 on probation for a

period of two years. On 26.09.2000, the petitioner made a representation

before the respondent authorities for confirmation of her services. An

order was passed in this regard on 12.12.2005 and the services of the

petitioner were confirmed from 27.07.2002. Thereafter, the petitioner

moved a fresh representation on 06.06.2006 before the respondent

authorities to the effect that her services ought to have been regularized

on completion of two years probation period i.e. on 04.05.1998 but her

services were confirmed on 27.07.2002 and the annual increment was
      Neutral Citation
     2024:CGHC:25017

                                    3





granted from the year 2003. It is further pleaded that in the year 2005,

some of the project officers were promoted to the post of Assistant

Director but the name of the petitioner was not taken into consideration.



Thereafter, Writ Petition No. 3984 of 2007 was filed claiming therein

annual increment, the benefit of seniority, promotion, confirmation of

probation immediately after completion of two years and consequential

benefits. That petition was disposed of on 28.03.2008 granting liberty to

the petitioner to make a representation before the respondent authorities

and the direction was issued to the concerned authority to decide the

representation within a stipulated time. The petitioner submitted her

representation on 02.04.2008 and for a personal hearing, she was called

on 20.05.2008 and 27.05.2008. On 26.06.2008, an order was passed by

respondent No.1 but according to the petitioner, her representation was

not considered properly. Thereafter, the petitioner filed a Contempt

Petition No.175 of 2008 which was disposed of on 20.01.2010 observing

that since the representation has already been decided, no case is made

out. On 01.02.2011, a letter was issued to the petitioner granting her a

personal hearing on her representation where she appeared on

06.01.2012 and 18.02.2013 and an order was passed on 24.09.2014.



The seniority list of the project officers was published with effect from

01.04.2012. Again the Departmental          Promotion Committee       was

convened in the month of July, 2013 and the name of the petitioner was

not considered thus, the petitioner has preferred this petition seeking the

reliefs as mentioned above.



3.     Mr. Sahu, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner argued that

the petitioner was entitled to get promotion to the post of Assistant
    Neutral Citation
   2024:CGHC:25017                  -4-




Director in the department in the year 2005 when similarly situated

project officers were promoted to the post of Assistant Director. He

further argued that again in the year 2013, her name was not considered.



He also argued that earlier, a writ petition was filed and the reliefs were

sought concerning confirmation of services after completion of a

probation period of two years, grant of seniority, promotion, grant of

annual increment from the date of appointment and its arrears and the

other reliefs. He further submitted that the representation made by the

petitioner pursuant to the order dated 28.03.2008 was decided by the

respondent authorities on 24.09.2014 and a copy of that order was

placed along with the return filed by the State. He also submitted that the

claim of the petitioner has not been redressed. He further stated that

certain allegations were made against the petitioner and those

allegations were duly inquired but nothing relevant was found. He also

stated that the Departmental Promotion Committee had found the

petitioner eligible for promotion and later on, the petitioner was promoted

to the post of Assistant Director vide order dated 22.07.2002 whereas

her name was considered in the Departmental Promotion Committee

convened in the year 2007. He referred to the minutes of the meeting of

the Departmental Promotion Committee where it is observed that no

adverse remarks were made against the petitioner and the annual

confidential report was not communicated to her. He further contended

that the petitioner was entitled to get a promotion in the year 2007 itself.



Thus, he prayed that a direction may be issued to the respondent

authorities to consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion from the

year 2007 and further to make payment of arrears of salary.

      Neutral Citation
     2024:CGHC:25017

                                     5


4.     On the other hand, Mr. Gupta, the learned Government Advocate

appearing for the State as well as Mr. Panda, learned counsel appearing

for respondent No. 4 would oppose the submissions made by Mr. Sahu.



They submitted that the petitioner could not complete two years of

probation period successfully as there were adverse remarks against

her. They further submitted that the probation period of the petitioner was

not found satisfactory by the Departmental Promotion Committee,

therefore, her services were confirmed from 27.07.2002. They also

submitted that the petitioner has not challenged the order dated

26.06.2008 whereby her representation was rejected. They further

argued that in WPS No.3984 of 2007, the petitioner challenged the order

dated 27.07.2002 whereby her services were confirmed, a direction to

respondent No.1 to issue a fresh order of revocation of the probation with

effect from 04.05.1998, grant of annual increment with effect from

04.05.1998 instead of 22.07.2002, arrears, reckoning of seniority, and

grant of promotion and release of withheld salary from March, 2007.



They also argued that the petition was disposed of on 28.03.2008

wherein the petitioner pressed only one relief concerning the completion

of her probation period on 04.05.1998 and other reliefs and grounds

were not raised by the petitioner and the direction was issued by this

Court to the respondent authorities to consider the grievance of the

petitioner. They further contended that the petitioner has waived her right

to seek other reliefs which were already sought in the earlier writ petition.



They also contended that the principle of waiver and acquiescence

would apply in toto in the present case. They further stated that again the

representation of the petitioner was rejected vide order dated 26.06.2008

and that order has also not been challenged by the petitioner in the
      Neutral Citation
     2024:CGHC:25017                 -6-




present petition whereby the claim of the petitioner was thoroughly

considered concerning grant of annual increment, seniority, promotion

etc. They also stated that the claim of the petitioner concerning

promotion was turned down by the department wherein it is observed by

the authority that though the representation of the petitioner was rejected

by the State on merits even thereafter the petitioner made repeated

representations including the review application and therefore, an

explanation was sought from the petitioner and again a representation

was made on 01.02.2011. In para 6 of the order dated 24.09.2014, it is

held that in the DPC held in the year 2013, the name of the petitioner

was considered but she was not found suitable by the Departmental

Promotion Committee. Even in the year 2005, her name was within the

zone of consideration but she was not found fit. In para 8, it is observed

by the authority that there is no improvement in the functioning of the

petitioner, she used to disobey the orders of superior authorities and she

made representations raising similar grievances. They further contended

that as per the averments made in the petition, the petitioner was entitled

to get a promotion in the year 2005 and thereafter in the year 2013 but

the claim of the promotion was raised in the earlier petition which was

not pressed and no representation in this regard was made before the

State authorities and therefore, after a lapse of nine years, the

petitioner's claim with regard to seniority and promotion is stale.



Therefore, the present petition is liable to be dismissed.



5.     I have heard learned counsel appearing for the parties and

perused the documents placed on the record.



6.     Admittedly, the petitioner was appointed to the post of Project
      Neutral Citation
     2024:CGHC:25017

                                      7





Officer under the Mahila Avam Bal Vikas Vibhag and her services were

regularized on 22.07.2002. Initially, the petitioner was appointed on

probation for a period of two years and when her services were not

confirmed, she made a representation but from a perusal of the order

dated 26.06.2008, certain adverse remarks appear against the petitioner,

therefore, her services were not confirmed. Undisputedly, the petitioner

has not challenged the order dated 26.06.2008 whereas that order was

passed pursuant to the order passed in WPS No.3984 of 2007.



7.     WPS No. 3984 of 2007 was filed and the following reliefs were

sought:-



           "(1) That this Hon'ble Court may kindly be pleased to
           issue a writ in the nature of mandamus commanding
           the respondents to produce the entire records relating
           to the probation, promotion as well as withholding of the
           petitioner's salary for kind perusal of this Court;
           (2) That this Hon'ble Court may kindly be pleased to
           issue a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the
           impugned order Annexure P/1;

           (3) That this Hon'ble Court may kindly be pleased to
           issue a writ in the nature of mandamus commanding
           the respondent No.1 to issue fresh order of revocation
           of probation w.e.f. 04.05.1998 i.e. the date on which the
           petitioner completed two years probation period;
           (4) That the respondents may kindly be directed to
           grant benefit of annual increment w.e.f. 04.05.1998
           instead of 22.07.2002 and arrears of increments and
           other consequential benefits may kindly be granted to
           the petitioner.

           (5) That the respondent No.1 may kindly be directed to
           promote the petitioner on the next higher post from the
           date on which junior to her has been promoted and
           assigned the seniority on the appropriate place together
           with all consequential benefits;

           (6) That this Hon'ble Court may kindly be pleased to
           command the respondents to forthwith release the
           withheld salary for the period from March 2007 till date;
           (7) Any other relief which this Hon'ble Court may deem
           fit and proper may also be passed in favour of the
       Neutral Citation
      2024:CGHC:25017                   -8-





            petitioner."



8.      The order dated 28.03.2008 would reveal that the petitioner

pressed only the issue of the confirmation of her services after the

completion of the probation period of two years but the other reliefs were

not pressed or raised before this Court, therefore, a direction was given

to the State authorities to consider the claim of the petitioner with regard

to probation only and the same was rejected by the authority vide order

dated 26.06.2008.



9.      The petitioner was entitled to get a promotion in the year 2005 as

per the pleading made in the present petition and thereafter in the year

2013. With regard to promotion in the year 2005 as claimed by the

petitioner, the petition is time-barred. Service-related claims cannot be

raised after the lapse of an inordinate period as held by the Hon'ble

Supreme Court in the catena of judgments.



10.     There are certain observations in the note-sheet but no specific

order was issued by any of the authorities in favour of the petitioner,

therefore, the note-sheet would not confer any right in favour of the

petitioner.



11.     With regard to delay in claiming seniority and promotion, the

Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of 
Chennai Metropolitan Water

Supply and Sewerage Board and Others Vs. T.T. Murali Babu


reported in (2014) 4 SCC 108 held as under:-




                 '17. In the case at hand, though there has been four
                 years' delay in approaching the court, yet the writ court
                 chose not to address the same. It is the duty of the court
                 to scrutinize whether such enormous delay is to be
                 ignored without any justification. That apart, in the
                 present case, such belated approach gains more
       Neutral Citation
      2024:CGHC:25017

                                          9




                 significance as the respondent employee being
                 absolutely careless to his duty and nurturing a
                 lackadaisical attitude to the responsibility had remain
                 unauthorizedly absent on the pretext of some kind of ill
                 health. We repeat at the cost of repetition that remaining
                 innocuously oblivious to such delay does not foster the
                 cause of justice. On the contrary, it brings in injustice, for
                 it is likely to affect others. Such delay may have impact
                 on others' ripened rights and may unnecessarily drag
                 others into litigation which in acceptable realm of
                 probability, may have been treated to have attained
                 finality. A court is not expected to give indulgence to such
                 indolent persons -who compete with "Kumbhakarna" or
                 for that matter "Rip Van Winkle" . In our considered
                 opinion, such delay does not deserve any indulgence and
                 on the said ground alone the writ court should have
                 thrown the petition overboard at the very threshold.

12.     Recently,    the    Apex    Court     in   the   matter     of   
Rushibhai

Jagdishbhai Pathak Vs. Bhavnagar Municipal Corporation
 reported

in 2022 SCC Online SC 64 held as under:-




 
'9. The doctrine of delay and laches, or for that matter
                 statutes of limitation, are considered to be statutes of
                 repose and statutes of peace, though some contrary
                 opinions have been expressed (in Nav Rattanmal Vs.
                 state of Rajasthan, AIR 1961 SC 1704). The courts have
                 expressed the view that the law of limitation rests on the
                 foundations of greater public interest for three reasons,
                 namely, (a) that long dormant claims have more of cruelty
                 than justice in them; (b) that a defendant might have lost
                 the evidence to disapprove a stale claim; and (iii) that
                 persons with good causes of action (who are able to
                 enforce them) should pursue them with reasonable
                 diligence (
State of Kerala Vs. V.R. Kalliyanikutty
, (1999) 3
                 SCC 657 relying on Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th Edn.,
                 Vol. 28, para 605; Halsbury's Laws of England , Vol. 68
                 (2021) para 1005. Equally, change in de facto position or
                 character, creation of third party rights over a period of
                 time, waiver, acquiesce, and need to ensure certitude in
                 dealings, are equitable public policy considerations why
                 period of limitation is prescribed by law. Law of limitation
                 does not apply to writ petitions, albeit the discretion
                 vested with a constitutional court is exercised with caution
                 as delay and laches principle is applied with the aim to
                 secure the quiet of the community, suppress fraud and
                 perjury, quicken diligence, and prevent oppression.
(see
                 
Popat and Kotecha Property Vs. State Bank of India Staff
                 Association
 (2005) 7 SCC 510).Therefore, some decisions
                 and judgments do not look upon pleas of delay and laches
                 with favour, especially and rightly in cases where the
                 persons suffer from adeptness, or incapacity to approach
                 the courts for relief. However, other decisions, while
                 accepting the rules of limitation as well as delay and
                 laches, have observed that such rules are not meant to
       Neutral Citation
      2024:CGHC:25017                    -10-


 
destroy the rights of the parties but serve a larger public
                 interest and are founded on public policy. There must be a
                 lifespan during which a person must approach the court
                 for their remedy. Otherwise, there would be unending
                 uncertainty as to the rights and obligations of the parties.
                 (See 
N. Blarkrishnan Vs. M. Krishnamurthy
, (1998)7 SCC


                 123. Referring to the principle of delay and laches, this
                 Court, way back in Moons Mils Ltd Vs. M.R. Mehar,
                 President, Industrial Court, Bombay AIR 1967 SC 1450,
                 had referred to the view expressed by Sir Barnes Peacock
                 in The Lindsay Petroleum          Company and Prosper
                 Armstrong Hurd, Abram Farewell, and John Kemp, (L.R.)
                 5 P.C.221 in the following words:

                 " Now the doctrine of laches in Courts of Equity is not an
                 arbitrary or a technical doctrine, Where it would be
                 practically unjust to give a remedy, either because the
                 party has, by his conduct, done that which might fairly be
                 regarded as equivalent to a waiver of it, or where by this
                 conduct and neglect he has though perhaps not waiving
                 that remedy, yet put the other party in a situation in which it
                 would not be reasonable to place him if the remedy were
                 afterwards to be asserted, in either of these cases, lapse
                 of time and delay are most material. But in every case,if an
                 argument against relief, which otherwise would be just, is
                 founded upon mere delay, that delay of course not
                 amounting to a bar by any statute of limitations, the validity
                 of that defence must be tried upon principles substantially
                 equitable. Two circumstances, always important in such
                 cases, are, the length of the delay and the nature of the
                 acts done during the interval, which might affect either
                 party and cause a balance of justice or injustice in taking
                 the one course or the other, so far as relates to the
                 remedy."



13.     The law with regard to waiver and acquiescence is no more res

integra. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of 
Bichitrananda

Behera Vs. State of Orissa and others
 reported in 2023 Livelaw (SC)

883 under relevant para 21 held as under:-




                 "21. Profitably, we may reproduce relevant passages from
                 certain decisions of this Court:

 
(
A) Union of India v Tarsem Singh
, (2008) 8 SCC 648:


                 "To summarise, normally, a belated service related claim
                 will be rejected on the ground of delay and laches (where
                 remedy is sought by filing a writ petition) or limitation
                 (where remedy is sought by an application to the
                 Administrative Tribunal). One of the exceptions to the said
                 rule is cases relating to a continuing wrong. Where a
                 service related claim is based on a continuing wrong, relief
                 can be granted even if there is a long delay in seeking
                 remedy, with reference to the date on which the continuing
 Neutral Citation
2024:CGHC:25017

                                     11




           wrong commenced, if such continuing wrong creates a
           continuing source of injury. But there is an exception to the
           exception. If the grievance is in respect of any order or
           administrative decision which related to or affected several
           others also, and if the reopening of the issue would affect
           the settled rights of third parties, then the claim will not be
           entertained. For example, if the issue relates to payment or
           refixation of pay or pension, relief may be granted in spite
           of delay as it does not affect the rights of third parties. But if
           the claim involved issues relating to seniority or promotion,
           etc., affecting others, delay would render the claim stale
           and doctrine of laches/limitation will be applied. Insofar as
           the consequential relief of recovery of arrears for a past
           period is concerned, the principles relating to
           recurring/successive wrongs will apply. As a consequence,
           the High Courts will restrict the consequential relief relating
           to arrears normally to a period of three years prior to the
           date of filing of the writ petition."             (emphasis
           supplied)
           (B) Union of India v N Murugesan, (2022) 2 SCC 25:

           "Delay, laches and acquiescence

           20. The principles governing delay, laches, and
           acquiescence are overlapping and interconnected on many
           occasions. However, they have their distinct characters and
           distinct elements. One can say that delay is the genus to
           which laches and acquiescence are species. Similarly,
           laches might be called a genus to a species by name
           acquiescence. However, there may be a case where
           acquiescence is involved, but not laches. These principles
           are common law principles, and perhaps one could identify
           that these principles find place in various statutes which
           restrict the period of limitation and create non consideration
           of condonation in certain circumstances. They are bound to
           be applied by way of practice requiring prudence of the
           court than of a strict application of law. The underlying
           principle governing these concepts would be one of
           estoppel. The question of prejudice is also an important
           issue to be taken note of by the court.

           Laches

           21. The word "laches" is derived from the French language
           meaning "remissness and slackness". It thus involves
           unreasonable delay or negligence in pursuing a claim
           involving an equitable relief while causing prejudice to the
           other party. It is neglect on the part of a party to do an act
           which law requires while asserting a right, and therefore,
           must stand in the way of the party getting relief or remedy.

           22. Two essential factors to be seen are the length of the
           delay and the nature of acts done during the interval. As
           stated, it would also involve acquiescence on the part of the
           party approaching the court apart from the change in
           position in the interregnum. Therefore, it would be
           unjustifiable for a Court of Equity to confer a remedy on a
           party who knocks its doors when his acts would indicate a
           waiver of such a right. By his conduct, he has put the other
 Neutral Citation
2024:CGHC:25017                    -12-




           party in a particular position, and therefore, it would be
           unreasonable to facilitate a challenge before the court.
           Thus, a man responsible for his conduct on equity is not
           expected to be allowed to avail a remedy.

           23. A defence of laches can only be allowed when there is
           no statutory bar. The question as to whether there exists a
           clear case of laches on the part of a person seeking a
           remedy is one of fact and so also that of prejudice. The said
           principle may not have any application when the existence
           of fraud is pleaded and proved by the other side. To
           determine the difference between the concept of laches and
           acquiescence is that, in a case involving mere laches, the
           principle of estoppel would apply to all the defences that are
           available to a party. Therefore, a defendant can succeed on
           the various grounds raised by the plaintiff, while an issue
           concerned alone would be amenable to acquiescence.
           Acquiescence

           24. We have already discussed the relationship between
           acquiescence on the one hand and delay and laches on the
           other.

           25. Acquiescence would mean a tacit or passive
           acceptance. It is implied and reluctant consent to an act. In
           other words, such an action would qualify a passive assent.
           Thus, when acquiescence takes place, it presupposes
           knowledge against a particular act. From the knowledge
           comes passive acceptance, therefore instead of taking any
           action against any alleged refusal to perform the original
           contract, despite adequate knowledge of its terms, and
           instead being allowed to continue by consciously ignoring it
           and thereafter proceeding further, acquiescence does take
           place. As a consequence, it reintroduces a new implied
           agreement between the parties. Once such a situation
           arises, it is not open to the party that acquiesced itself to
           insist upon the compliance of the original terms. Hence,
           what is essential, is the conduct of the parties. We only dealt
           with the distinction involving a mere acquiescence. When
           acquiescence is followed by delay, it may become laches.
           Here again, we are inclined to hold that the concept of
           acquiescence is to be seen on a case-to-case basis."

                 (emphasis supplied)
           (C) Chairman, State Bank of India v M J James, (2022) 2
           SCC 301:

           "36. What is a reasonable time is not to be put in a
           straitjacket formula or judicially codified in the form of days,
           etc. as it depends upon the facts and circumstances of each
           case. A right not exercised for a long time is nonexistent.
           Doctrine of delay and laches as well as acquiescence are
           applied to non-suit the litigants who approach the
           court/appellate authorities belatedly without any justifiable
           explanation for bringing action after unreasonable delay. In
           the present case, challenge to the order of dismissal from
           service by way of appeal was after four years and five
           months, which is certainly highly belated and beyond
           justifiable time. Without satisfactory explanation justifying the
 Neutral Citation
2024:CGHC:25017

                                   13




           delay, it is difficult to hold that the appeal was preferred
           within a reasonable time. Pertinently, the challenge was
           primarily on the ground that the respondent was not allowed
           to be represented by a representative of his choice. The
           respondent knew that even if he were to succeed on this
           ground, as has happened in the writ proceedings, fresh
           inquiry would not be prohibited as finality is not attached
           unless there is a legal or statutory bar, an aspect which has
           been also noticed in the impugned judgment. This is
           highlighted to show the prejudice caused to the appellants by
           the delayed challenge. We would, subsequently, examine
           the question of acquiescence and its judicial effect in the
           context of the present case.

           Xxx

           38. 
In 
Ram Chand v. Union of India [Ram Chand
 v. Union of
           India, (1994) 1 SCC 44] and State of U.P. v. Manohar [State
           of U.P. v. Manohar, (2005) 2 SCC 126] this Court observed
           that if the statutory authority has not performed its duty within
           a reasonable time, it cannot justify the same by taking the
           plea that the person who has been deprived of his rights has
           not approached the appropriate forum for relief. If a statutory
           authority does not pass any orders and thereby fails to
           comply with the statutory mandate within reasonable time,
           they normally should not be permitted to take the defence of
           laches and delay.
 
If at all, in such cases, the delay furnishes
           a cause of action, which in some cases as elucidated in
           
Union of India v. Tarsem Singh [Union of India
 v. Tarsem
           Singh, (2008) 8 SCC 648 : (2008) 2 SCC (L&S) 765] may be
           continuing cause of action.The State being a virtuous litigant
           should meet the genuine claims and not deny them for want
           of action on their part. However, this general principle would
           not apply when, on consideration of the facts, the court
           concludes that the respondent had abandoned his rights,
           which may be either express or implied from his conduct.


Abandonment implies intentional act to acknowledge, as has
           been held in para 6 of Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Co. Ltd.
           v. State of U.P. [Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Co. Ltd. v.
           State of U.P., (1979) 2 SCC 409 : 1979 SCC (Tax) 144]
           Applying this principle of acquiescence to the precept of
           delay and laches, this Court in U.P. Jal Nigam v.Jaswant
           
Singh [U.P. Jal Nigam v. Jaswant Singh
, (2006) 11 SCC 464 :


 
(2007) 1 SCC (L&S) 500] after referring to several judgments,
           has accepted the following elucidation in Halsbury's Laws of
           England : (
Jaswant Singh
 case [
U.P. Jal Nigam v. Jaswant
           Singh
, (2006) 11 SCC 464 : (2007) 1 SCC (L&S) 500] , SCC
           pp. 470-71, paras 1213)
           "12. The statement of law has also been summarised in
           Halsbury's Laws of England, Para 911,p. 395 as follows:


           'In determining whether there has been such delay as to
           amount to laches, the chief points to be considered are:

           (i) acquiescence on the claimant's part;and

           (ii) any change of position that has occurred on the
           defendant's part.

 Neutral Citation
2024:CGHC:25017                    -14-




           Acquiescence in this sense does not mean standing by while
           the violation of a right is in progress,but assent after the
           violation has been completed and the claimant has become
           aware of it. It is unjust to give the claimant a remedy where,
           by his conduct, he has done that which might fairly be
           regarded as equivalent to a waiver of it; or where by his
           conduct and neglect, though not waiving the remedy, he has
           put the other party in a position in which it would not be
           reasonable to place him if the remedy were afterwards to be
           asserted. In such cases lapse of time and delay are most
           material. Upon these considerations rests the doctrine of
           laches.'

           13. In view of the statement of law as summarised above, the
           respondents are guilty since the respondents have
           acquiesced in accepting the retirement and did not challenge
           the same in time. If they would have been vigilant enough,
           they could have filed writ petitions as others did in the matter.
           Therefore, whenever it appears that the claimants lost time or
           whiled it away and did not rise to the occasion in time for filing
           the writ petitions, then in such cases, the court should be very
           slow in granting the relief to the incumbent. Secondly, it has
           also to be taken into consideration the question of
           acquiescence or waiver on the part of the incumbent whether
           other parties are going to be prejudiced if the relief is granted.
           In the present case, if the respondents would have challenged
           their retirement being violative of the provisions of the Act,
           perhaps the Nigam could have taken appropriate steps to
           raise funds so as to meet the liability but by not asserting their
           rights the respondents have allowed time to pass and after a
           lapse of couple of years, they have filed writ petitions claiming
           the benefit for two years. That will definitely require the Nigam
           to raise funds which is going to have serious financial
           repercussions on the financial management of the Nigam.
           Why should the court come to the rescue of such persons
           when they themselves are guilty of waiver and
           acquiescence?"

           39. Before proceeding further, it is important to clarify
           distinction between "acquiescence" and "delay and laches".

 
Doctrine of acquiescence is an equitable doctrine which
           applies when a party having a right stands by and sees
           another dealing in a manner inconsistent with that right, while
           the act is in progress and after violation is completed, which
           conduct reflects his assent or accord. He cannot afterwards
           complain. [See 
Prabhakar v. Sericulture Deptt.
, (2015) 15 SCC
           1 : (2016) 2 SCC (L&S) 149.
 
Also, see 
Gobinda Ramanuj Das
           Mohanta v. Ram Charan Das
, 1925 SCC OnLine Cal 30 : AIR
           1925 Cal 1107] In literal sense, the term acquiescence means
           silent assent, tacit consent, concurrence, or acceptance, [See
           
Vidyavathi Kapoor Trust v. CIT
, 1991 SCC OnLine Kar 331 :


           (1992) 194 ITR 584] which denotes conduct that is evidence
           of an intention of a party to abandon an equitable right and
           also to denote conduct from which another party will be
           justified in inferring such an intention. [See Krishan Dev v.

           Ram Piari, 1964 SCC OnLine HP 5 : AIR 1964 HP 34]
           Acquiescence can be either direct with full knowledge and
           express approbation, or indirect where a person having the
               Neutral Citation
              2024:CGHC:25017

                                                 15




                         right to set aside the action stands by and sees another
                         dealing in a manner inconsistent with that right and in spite of
                         the infringement takes no action mirroring acceptance. [See
                         "Introduction", U.N. Mitra, Tagore Law Lectures -- Law of
                         Limitation and Prescription, Vol. I, 14th Edn., 2016.] However,
                         acquiescence will not apply if lapse of time is of no importance
                         or consequence.

                         40. Laches unlike limitation is flexible. However, both limitation
                         and laches destroy the remedy but not the right. Laches like
                         acquiescence is based upon equitable considerations, but
                         laches unlike acquiescence imports even simple passivity. On
                         the other hand, acquiescence implies active assent and is
                         based upon the rule of estoppel in pais. As a form of estoppel,
                         it bars a party afterwards from complaining of the violation of
                         the right. 
Even indirect acquiescence implies almost active
                         consent, which is not to be inferred by mere silence or inaction
                         which is involved in laches. Acquiescence in this manner is
                         quite distinct from delay. Acquiescence virtually destroys the
                         right of the person. [See 
Vidyavathi Kapoor Trust v. CIT
, 1991
                         SCC OnLine Kar 331 : (1992) 194 ITR 584] Given the
                         aforesaid legal position, inactive acquiescence on the part of
                         the respondent can be inferred till the filing of the appeal, and
                         not for the period post filing of the appeal. Nevertheless, this
                         acquiescence being in the nature of estoppel bars the
                         respondent from claiming violation of the right of fair
                         representation."




        14.     Admittedly, the petitioner has not challenged the initial order

        passed by the respondents dated 26.06.2008 and in the earlier round of

        litigation, she did not press the issue of promotion, seniority and grant of

        arrears of salary, therefore, in this petition, she cannot be permitted to

        raise those reliefs which were sought in the earlier writ petition.



 
15.     Taking into consideration the above-stated facts and the law 
laid

        down by
 the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matters of 
Chennai

        Metropolitan Water Supply
 (supra), 
Rushibhai Jagdishbhai Pathak


        (supra) and 
Bichitrananda Behera
 (supra), no case is made out for

        interference. Consequently, the present petition fails and is hereby

        dismissed. No cost(s).                                     Sd/-




                                                         (Rakesh Mohan Pandey)
                                                                 Judge
Rekha
 

