



[Cites 
23
, Cited by 
3
]




Chattisgarh High Court


Chhattisgarh Rajya Gramin Bank vs Abdul Mateen 2 Wpl/22/2020 ... on 31 August, 2020


Author: 
P. Sam Koshy


Bench: 
P. Sam Koshy


                                    1

                                                                     AFR
        HIGH COURT OF CHHATTISGARH, BILASPUR

                    Writ Petition (L) No. 55 of 2020

                          Reserved on 25.08.2020

                          Delivered on 31.08.2020

  Chhattisgarh Rajya Gramin Bank Through The Chairman, Mahadev
  Ghat Road, Sunder Nagar, Raipur, CG 492013
                                                           ---- Petitioner

                                Versus

1. Meghraj Pathak S/o Late Dhanraj Pathak R/o At H.No. 15, Sai Baba
   Layout, Aghanpur, Jagdalpur, District Bastar, Chhattisgarh

2. The Appellate Authority under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act
 & the Deputy
   Labour Commissioner (C), Government of India, Ministry of Labour &
   Employment, Raipur, Chhattisgarh

3. The Controlling Authority and the Assistant Labour Commissioner (C)
   Raipur, Chhattisgarh
                                                        ---- Respondents


                              WPL No. 56 of 2020


 Chhattisgarh Rajya Gramin Bank Through The Chairman, Mahadev
  Ghat Road, Sunder Nagar, Raipur, CG 492013

                                                           ---- Petitioner

                                Versus


1. Mohd. Azam Hussain S/o Late Akbar Hussain, R/o At- Flat No. 104,
   Gulshan Apartment, Raja Talab, Raipur, District Raipur Chhattisgarh.
   492001


2. The Appellate Authority under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act
 & the Deputy
   Labour Commissioner (C), Government of India, Ministry of Labour &
   Employment, Raipur, Chhattisgarh


3. The Controlling Authority and the Assistant Labour Commissioner (C)
   Raipur, Chhattisgarh                                 ---- Respondents

                                     2


                            WPL No. 21 of 2020


 Chhattisgarh Rajya Gramin Bank Through The Chairman, Mahadev
  Ghat Road, Sunder Nagar, Raipur, CG 492013                  ---- Petitioner
                               Versus


1. Abdul Mateen S/o Abdul Mannan, R/o H. No. 76, Near Saint Joseph
   Church, Behind Laxmi Gas Agency, Byron Baazar, District Raipur
   Chhattisgarh. 492001


2. The Appellate Authority under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act
 & the Deputy
   Labour Commissioner (C), Government of India, Ministry of Labour &
   Employment, Raipur, Chhattisgarh


3. The Controlling Authority and the Assistant Labour Commissioner (C)
   Raipur, Chhattisgarh                                    ---- Respondents



                          WPL No. 23 of 2020


 Chhattisgarh Rajya Gramin Bank Through The Chairman, Mahadev
  Ghat Road, Sunder Nagar, Raipur, CG 492013

                                                               ---- Petitioner

                               Versus


1. Shri Pramod Kumar Upadhayay S/o Chandu Lal Upadhyay R/o Shiva
   Parisar,   Kanchangan    Ganga       Colony,   Phase-2, District-   Raipur,
   Chhattisgarh, 492010


2. The Appellate Authority under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act
 & the Deputy
   Labour Commissioner (C), Government of India, Ministry of Labour &
   Employment, Raipur, Chhattisgarh


3. The Controlling Authority and the Assistant Labour Commissioner (C)
   Raipur, Chhattisgarh


                                                           ---- Respondents


                          WPL No. 24 of 2020


 Chhattisgarh Rajya Gramin Bank Through The Chairman, Mahadev
  Ghat Road, Sunder Nagar, Raipur, CG 492013                   ---- Petitioner

                                   3


                               Versus


1. Mohd. Faruque Khan S/o Late Abdul Razzak R/o At Piyali Foundation,
   In Front Of Old Dhanvantari Hospital, Near Tondon Dairy, New Shanti
   Nagar, District Raipur Chhattisgarh, 492001


2. The Appellate Authority under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act
 & the Deputy
   Labour Commissioner (C), Government of India, Ministry of Labour &
   Employment, Raipur, Chhattisgarh


3. The Controlling Authority and the Assistant Labour Commissioner (C)
   Raipur, Chhattisgarh


                                                       ---- Respondents


                          WPL No. 25 of 2020


 Chhattisgarh Rajya Gramin Bank Through The Chairman, Mahadev
  Ghat Road, Sunder Nagar, Raipur, CG 492013

                                                          ---- Petitioner

                               Versus


1. Laxmikant Sahu R/o At Qtr. No. 12/1040, Siddheswari Temple Marg,
   Kota Raipur, Po - Pt. R.S. University, District Raipur, Chhattisgarh.
   492010


2. The Appellate Authority under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act
 & the Deputy
   Labour Commissioner (C), Government of India, Ministry of Labour &
   Employment, Raipur, Chhattisgarh


3. The Controlling Authority and the Assistant Labour Commissioner (C)
   Raipur, Chhattisgarh


                                                       ---- Respondents


                          WPL No. 26 of 2020


 Chhattisgarh Rajya Gramin Bank Through The Chairman, Mahadev
  Ghat Road, Sunder Nagar, Raipur, CG 492013

                                                          ---- Petitioner

                               Versus

                                    4


1. Arun R. Katyayani S/o Shri R. R. Katyayani, R/o 313/39, Near Rani
   Laxmi Bai Chowk, Behind Kela Badi Shopping Complex, Kela Badi,
   Durg, District Durg, Chhattisgarh. 491001


2. The Appellate Authority under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act
 & the Deputy
   Labour Commissioner (C), Government of India, Ministry of Labour &
   Employment, Raipur, Chhattisgarh


3. The Controlling Authority and the Assistant Labour Commissioner (C)
   Raipur, Chhattisgarh


                                                        ---- Respondents


                          WPL No. 27 of 2020


 Chhattisgarh Rajya Gramin Bank Through The Chairman, Mahadev
  Ghat Road, Sunder Nagar, Raipur, CG 492013

                                                            ---- Petitioner

                               Versus


1. Arun Phansalkar S/o Late Vasant Phansalkar, R/o Plot No. 34,
   Rajnigandha Colony, Vidyut Nagar, Durg, District Durg, Chhattisgarh


2. The Appellate Authority under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act
 & the Deputy
   Labour Commissioner (C), Government of India, Ministry of Labour &
   Employment, Raipur, Chhattisgarh


3. The Controlling Authority and the Assistant Labour Commissioner (C)
   Raipur, Chhattisgarh


                                                        ---- Respondents


                          WPL No. 28 of 2020


 Chhattisgarh Rajya Gramin Bank Through The Chairman, Mahadev
  Ghat Road, Sunder Nagar, Raipur, CG 492013

                                                            ---- Petitioner

                               Versus


1. Shri Krishna Lal Singh R/o - At B-202, Housing Board Colony, G.E.
   Road, Girls College, District - Durg, Chhattisgarh, 491001

                                    5


2. The Appellate Authority under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act
 & the Deputy
   Labour Commissioner (C), Government of India, Ministry of Labour &
   Employment, Raipur, Chhattisgarh


3. The Controlling Authority and the Assistant Labour Commissioner (C)
   Raipur, Chhattisgarh


                                                        ---- Respondents


                          WPL No. 29 of 2020


 Chhattisgarh Rajya Gramin Bank Through The Chairman, Mahadev
  Ghat Road, Sunder Nagar, Raipur, CG 492013

                                                            ---- Petitioner

                                Versus


1. Shri Mohan Lal Kosre S/o Late G.R. Kosre R/o Subhash Nagar, Ward
   No-42, Near Shiv Mandir, District- Durg, Chhattisgarh, 490020


2. The Appellate Authority under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act
 & the Deputy
   Labour Commissioner (C), Government of India, Ministry of Labour &
   Employment, Raipur, Chhattisgarh


3. The Controlling Authority and the Assistant Labour Commissioner (C)
   Raipur, Chhattisgarh


                                                        ---- Respondents


                          WPL No. 30 of 2020


 Chhattisgarh Rajya Gramin Bank Through The Chairman, Mahadev
  Ghat Road, Sunder Nagar, Raipur, CG 492013

                                                            ---- Petitioner

                                Versus


1. Shri Hari Pradhan S/o Late Keshav Prasad, R/o Quarter No. 642/ B,
   Street No. 36, Smriti Nagar, Post Office- Nehru Nagar, Bhilai, District-
   Durg, Chhattisgarh. 490020


2. The Appellate Authority under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act
 & the Deputy
   Labour Commissioner (C), Government of India, Ministry of Labour &
   Employment, Raipur, Chhattisgarh

                                   6


3. The Controlling Authority and the Assistant Labour Commissioner (C)
  Raipur, Chhattisgarh

                                                      ---- Respondents

                          WPL No. 60 of 2020


 Chhattisgarh Rajya Gramin Bank Through The Chairman Mahadev
  Ghat Road, Sunder Nagar, Raipur, Chhattisgarh


                                                         ---- Petitioner

                               Versus


1. Rohit Kumar Chandrakar S/o Late Bhukan Lal Chandrakar R/o At L.I.G.
   349/A, Padmanabhpur, Durg, District Durg.



2. The Appellate Authority Under The Payment Of Gratuity Act and The
   Deputy Labour Commissioner (C), Government Of India, Ministry Of
   Labour And Employment Raipur, Chhattisgarh


3. The Controlling Authority And The Assistant Labour Commissioner (C)
   Raipur, Chhattisgarh


                                                      ---- Respondents


                          WPL No. 61 of 2020


  Chhattisgarh Rajya Gramin Bank Through The Chairman Mahadev
  Ghat Road, Sunder Nagar, Raipur Chhattisgarh 492013


                                                         ---- Petitioner

                               Versus


1. Hasan Mohammed Quraishi S/o Jan Hond. Quraishi R/o At 49/66,
  Kasaridih, Durg District Durg Chhattisgarh 491001


2. The Appellate Authority Under The Payment Of Gratuity Act and The
  Deputy Labour Commissioner (C), Government Of India, Ministry Of
  Labour And Employment, Raipur Chhattisgarh

                                   7


3. The Controlling Authority and the Assistant Labour Commissioner (C)
  Raipur Chhattisgarh


                                                      ---- Respondents


                         WPL No. 62 of 2020


  Chhattisgarh Rajya Gramin Bank Through The Chairman Mahadev
  Ghat Road, Sunder Nagar, Raipur Chhattisgarh 492013, District :

  Raipur, Chhattisgarh


                                                          ---- Petitioner

                              Versus


1. Sashikant Awadhut S/o Late S L Awadhut R/o At Lig 6, Housing Board
  Colony, Bodhghat, Jagdalpur, District Bastar Chhattisgarh


2. The Appellate Authority Under The Payment Of Gratuity Act And The
  Deputy Labour Commissioner (C), Government Of India, Ministry Of
  Labour And Employment, Raipur Chhattisgarh


3. The Controlling Authority And The Assistant Labour Commissioner (C)
  Raipur Chhattisgarh


                                                      ---- Respondents


                         WPL No. 69 of 2020


  Chhattisgarh Rajya Gramin Bank Through The Chairman Mahadev
  Ghat Road, Sunder Nagar, Raipur Chhattisgarh 492013


                                                          ---- Petitioner

                              Versus


1. Kishwar Khan W/o Late Mr. Arif Ahmed Khan (Retired), R/o C/o Shri S.
  A. Khan, C-57, Gayatri Nagar, Shankar Nagar, Raipur Chhattisgarh


2. The Appellate Authority, Under The Payment Of Gratuity Act And The

                                     8


   Deputy Labour Commissioner (C), Government Of India, Ministry Of
   Labour And Employment, Raipur, Chhattisgarh


3. The Controlling Authority And The Assistant Labour Commissioner (C)
   Raipur, Chhattisgarh


                                                        ---- Respondents




   For Petitioner             :    Mr. Kishore Bhaduri, Advocate
   For Respondent no.1        :    Mr. N. K. Vyas, Advocate



                            WPL No. 31 of 2020


1. Chhattisgarh Rajya Gramin Bank Through The Chairman, Mahadev
   Ghat Road, Sunder Nagar, Raipur, CG 492013

2. The Regional Manager, Chhattisgarh Rajya Gramin Bank, Regional
   Office, Raigarh, Mithumude Road, Kabir Chowk, Raigarh, Chhattisgarh.

   496001.

                                                          ---- Petitioners

                                  Versus


1. Lakhan Lal Pandey R/o- Railway Banglapara, District- Raigarh,
   Chhattisgarh, 496001


2. The Appellate Authority under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act
 & the Deputy
   Labour Commissioner (C), Government of India, Ministry of Labour &
   Employment, Raipur, Chhattisgarh


3. The Controlling Authority and the Regional Labour Commissioner (C)
   Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh


                                                        ---- Respondents


                            WPL No. 22 of 2020


1. Chhattisgarh Rajya Gramin Bank Through The Chairman, Mahadev
   Ghat Road, Sunder Nagar, Raipur, CG 492013

2. The Regional Manager, Chhattisgarh Rajya Gramin Bank, Regional
   Office, Raigarh, Mithumude Road, Kabir Chowk, Raigarh, Chhattisgarh,
   496001.                                                ---- Petitioners

                                     9


                                 Versus


1. Ravikant Pandey R/o Sanjay Maidan, Rambhata, District Raigarh
   Chhattisgarh, 496001


2. The Appellate Authority under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act
 & the Deputy
   Labour Commissioner (C), Government of India, Ministry of Labour &
   Employment, Raipur, Chhattisgarh


3. The Controlling Authority and the Regional Labour Commissioner (C)
   Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh

                                                           ---- Respondents



   For Petitioner            :     Mr. Kishore Bhaduri, Advocate
   For Respondent no.1       :     Mr. K. N. Nande, Advocate


                 Hon'ble Shri Justice P. Sam Koshy
                            Order On Board


1. Since the issue involved in the bunch of writ petitions and the cause of

   action also being the same, all these writ petitions are being decided by

   this common order.



2. In all these writ petitions the challenge is to the order passed by the

   Appellate Authority under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act
 rejecting the

   appeal preferred by the petitioner Bank thereby affirming the order

   passed by the Controlling Authority under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act
.

   (Since the date of passing of the orders by the two authorities i.e. the

   Appellate Authority & the Controlling Authority are different, the dates

   are not being deliberately mentioned, the contents of all the orders are

   identical.)


3. The common facts running all these writ petitions are that the

   respondent no.1 in all these writ petitions were officers of the petitioner

                                     10


   Bank. After serving the Bank for a considerable period of time, all the

   respondent no.1 officers stood retired on attaining the age of

   superannuation on different dates. After their retirement, in the process

   of settling their retiral dues, the Bank paid certain amount towards

   Gratuity to each of the respondent officers which according to the

   respondent no.1/officers was erroneously calculated. According to the

   respondent officers, they were entitled for much more than what was

   calculated by the petitioner Bank.         The respondent no.1/officers

   accordingly filed a claim application under the provisions of the

   
Payment of Gratuity Act
 for the difference of gratuity before the

   Controlling Authority under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act
 i.e. the Assistant

   Labour Commissioner (Central).



4. After due consideration of the pleadings and contentions put forth on

   either side, the learned Controlling Authority vide its order dated

   20.02.2019 allowed the application holding that the applicants therein

   are entitled for much more gratuity than what has been granted to them

   and passed an order. The amount of gratuity in each of the cases is

   different that is why this Court is not referring to any fixed amount.


5. The order dated 20.02.2019 passed by the Controlling Authority was

   subjected to challenge before the Appellate Authority i.e. the Dy. Chief

   Labour Commissioner (Central) located at Raipur.            The Appellate

   Authority also, after due consideration of the contentions put forth on

   either side, affirmed the order of the Controlling Authority thereby

   rejecting the appeal of the petitioner Bank.        It is these two orders

   passed by the Appellate Authority and the Controlling Authority which is

   under challenge in these bunch of writ petitions.

                                        11


6. The main dispute in all the writ petitions so also before the authorities

   concerned was, as to what would be the pay which would be taken into

   consideration for calculating the amount of gratuity.


7. On consideration of the submissions made by either party to the

   dispute, the core issue which needs consideration in these bunch of writ

   petitions is whether in the process of quantifying the amount of gratuity

   payable to the respondent no.1 officers, the dearness allowance would

   be treated as part of pay or not.



8. There are two provisions of law which need to be considered in the

   process of deciding the issue involved in these cases.       First is the

   
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972
 which is a central Act (hereinafter

   referred as "the Act of 1972"). Second is the Chhattisgarh Rajya Gramin

   Bank (Officers & Employees)Service Regulations, 2013 (hereinafter

   referred as "the Regulations of 2013").



9. Initially when all the respondent no.1 officers retired from service, the

   Bank gave them gratuity of rupees ten lakhs as that was the ceiling limit

   under the Act of 1972. Since the provisions under the Act of 1972 as

   also the Regulations of the petitioner Bank envisaged a clause that the

   Officers shall be entitled for the benefits under that provision which is

   more beneficial between the two. Based upon that when the petitioner

   Bank calculated the payment of gratuity payable to each of the

   respondent no.1 officers, the calculation made under the Regulations of

   2013 came to be more than the ceiling limit, therefore, the Bank

   decided to pay gratuity to the respondent no.1 officers as per the

   calculation under the Regulations of 2013. It is here that the dispute

   arose.

                                      12


10.      According to the respondent no.1 officers, while calculating the

   total amount of gratuity payable under the Regulations 2013 the

   petitioner Bank ought to have taken the dearness allowance received

   by the respondent no.1 officers as part of pay which would have

   enhanced the total amount substantially.



11.The sole contention raised by the petitioner Bank is that the respondent

   no.1 officers can have the option of getting gratuity either as per the

   calculation under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act
 with a ceiling of rupees 10

   lakhs or they may avail the gratuity in terms of the Regulations of 2013.

   According to the petitioner Bank, there cannot be a situation where the

   respondent officers can claim the benefit under both the provisions of

   law. In other words, the contention of the petitioner bank is that if the

   respondent officers contend that they would get gratuity under the Act of

   1972, the mode of calculation would be as provided under the said Act

   and taking into consideration the definition of wage as provided under

   the Act of 1972. In the alternative if the respondent officers choose and

   opt to have the benefit of the Regulations of 2013, the gratuity will be

   paid to them strictly in accordance to the mode and method of

   calculation as provided under clause 72 of the Regulations of 2013.


12. Learned counsel for the petitioner Bank does not dispute the fact that

  as per Sub 
Section 5
 of 
Section 4
 of the Act of 1972, an employee is

  entitled to receive better terms of gratuity under any award or agreement

  or contract with the employer. This in other words means if there is a

  scheme more beneficial framed by the employer, the officer/employee

  shall be entitled for gratuity strictly in accordance to the provisions of that

  beneficial legislation which in this case is the Regulations of 2013.

                                     13


13.       Referring to Clause 72 of the Regulations of 2013 it was

   vehemently contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the

   said provision provides for grant of gratuity to an officer @ one month

   pay for every completed year of service and in the event the employee

   has more than 30 years of service, he shall also be entitled for an

   additional amount @ one half of a months pay for each completed year

   of service beyond 30 years.



14.       For understanding what actually the 'pay' means, we will have to

   take the assistance of the definition as provided under Clause M of

   
Section 2
 which defines pay. According to the petitioner, the definition of

   pay under the Regulations of 2013 strictly means basic pay drawn per

   month in addition stagnation increments and any part of emoluments

   which may specifically be classified as "pay" under the Regulations. It is

   also the contention of the petitioner that when the definition of pay

   means only basic pay with stagnation increments and           emoluments

   specifically classified as pay, it means there is a deliberate exclusion of

   dearness allowance and therefore, dearness allowance cannot be taken

   into consideration for quantifying the amount of gratuity payable to the

   respondent No.1 officers.



15. 
In support of his contention, the learned counsel for the petitioner Bank

   heavily relied upon the decision of the High Court of Bombay in the case

   of 
Vidarbha Konkan Gramin Bank v. the Appellate Authority and

   another
, 2020 SCC on line Bombay 17 wherein the Single Bench of

   the Bombay High Court has allowed the petition of the Bank setting

   aside the order passed by the Appellate Authority and the Controlling

   Authority under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act
 and has also held that the

                                     14


  expression "pay" as provided under the Regulations of 2013 does not

  include dearness allowance along with basic pay.
 
In addition, the

  learned counsel for the petitioner also relied upon the judgment of the

  Allahabad High Court in the case of 
Baroda Uttar Pradesh Gramin

  Bank v. the Appellate Authority
 in Misc. Single No. 7163 of 2012

  decided on 15.10.2019.
 
He also relied upon the judgment of the Hon'ble

  Supreme Court in the case of 
Beed District Central Cooperative Bank

  Ltd. v. State of Maharashtra & others
, 2006 (8) SCC 514 wherein the

  golden rule of interpretation of statute was considered and it was held

  that even if the laws are beneficial legislation or welfare legislation, it

  does not contemplate that the claimant can have the liberty of obtaining

  the benefits both under the Act as well as under the Regulations.

  Referring to paragraph-14 of 
the said judgment
 counsel for the petitioner

  submitted that under the said ratio or principle of law laid down, the

  employee/officer can have the benefit of only the provision of law which

  he opts for and he cannot have the benefit under both laws.


16. Per contra, learned counsel appearing for the officers opposing the

  petitions submits that the Central Act i.e. the 
Payment of Gratuity Act


  itself provides for an employee to receive gratuity under the more

  beneficial scheme if any framed by the employer. In the instant case,

  according to the counsel for the respondent no.1, since there is a

  Regulation framed i.e. the Regulations of 2013 and there is a mode of

  calculation provided, the calculation of gratuity has to be made strictly in

  accordance with the provisions of Clause 72 of the Regulations of 2013.

  According to him, the term "pay" used in Clause 72 of the Regulations of

  2013 includes the basic pay with dearness allowance, increment and

                                      15


  also emoluments which have been specifically classified as part of pay.

  According to the counsel for the respondent no.1 officers, on a conjoint

  reading of the two definitions of 'emolument' and 'pay', under the

  Regulations 2013 it includes basic pay plus dearness allowance.


17. 
In support of his contention learned counsel for the officers heavily

  relied upon the judgment of the Madhya Pradesh High Court in the case

  of 
All India Gramin Bank Pensioners Organization Unit Rewa v.

  Madhyanchal Gramin Bank and Another
, WP No. 9182 of 2017 and

  connected writ petitions decided on 06.09.2018. The said judgment was

  further tested before the Division Bench which too affirmed the same in

  Writ Appeal No. 1318 of 2018 and other connected writ appeals decided

  on 26.02.2019.       According to the counsel for the respondent officers,

  both these judgments of the Madhya Pradesh High Court was further

  taken to the Supreme Court who have also given a stamp of approval by

  dismissing the SLP preferred by the Bank.
 
It was also the contention of

  Shri Vyas that the order of the Madhya Pradesh High Court has also

  recently been followed by the High Court of Telengana in the case of 
B.

  N. Nageswara Rao v. Sapthagin Grameena Bank & another
 decided

  on 07.02.2020.




18. Having heard the arguments put forth on either side it would be relevant

  at this juncture to refer to certain provisions of Regulation of 2013 which

  is germane for the adjudication of the present dispute. Before going into

  the definition of the different terminologies it would be trite at this

  juncture to refer to the Clause 72 of the Regulation of 2013 which deals

  with the Gratuity:



         "72.Gratuity. - (1) An officer or employee shall be eligible for

                                          16


             payment of gratuity either as per the provisions of the 
Payment

             of Gratuity Act, 1972
 (39 of 1972) or as per sub-regulation (2),

             whichever is higher.



             (2) Every officer or employee shall be eligible for gratuity on,-


             (a) retirement,


             (b) death,


             (c) disablement rendering him unfit for further service as
             certified by a medical officer approved by the Bank, or


             (d) resignation after completing 10 years of continuous service,
             or


             (e) termination of service in any other way except by way of
             punishment after completion of 10 years of service :


 
Provided that in respect of an employee there shall be no
             forfeiture of gratuity for dismissal on account of misconduct
             except in cases where such misconduct causes financial loss to
             the bank and 
in that case
 to that extent only.




          (3) The amount of gratuity payable to an officer or employee shall
              be one months pay for every completed year of service or part
              thereof in excess of six months subject to a maximum of 15
              month's pay :



             Provided that where an officer or employee has completed more
             than 30 years of service, he shall be eligible by way of gratuity
             for an additional amount at the rate of one half of a month's pay
             for each completed year of service beyond 30 years :


             Provided further that in respect of an officer the gratuity is
             payable based on the last pay drawn :



             Provided also that in respect of an employee pay for the
             purposes of calculation of the gratuity shall be the average of
             the basic pay (100%), dearness allowance and special
             allowance and officiating allowance payable during the 12
             months preceding death, disability, retirement, resignation or
             termination of service, as the case may be."



19. Plain reading of the aforesaid provisions of law what reflects is that

  even the aforesaid clause also clearly stipulates that an officer or an

  employee of the Bank shall be entitled for gratuity either under the

  
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972
 or as per the Sub-Clause 2 of the Clause

  72 of the Regulation of 2013 whichever fetches more monetary benefits

  to an employee or an officer.

                                        17


20. Now coming to the mode of calculation as per the sub clause 3 of the

   Regulation of 2013 the term "Pay" has been used for the purpose of

   calculating the gratuity to an officer. As we can see that it is mentioned

   that it shall be one Month's pay for every completed year of service.

   That it would be relevant at this juncture to take note of the fact that so

   far as the third proviso to Sub Clause 3 of Clause 72 envisages that for

   the purpose of calculating the gratuity in respect of an employee pay for

   the calculation shall be average of Basic pay, Dearness allowance and

   special allowances and officiating allowances payable during the last 12

   month's of the service. What is note worthy at this juncture is that the

   framers of the said provisions has clearly mentioned that in the case of

   an employee it shall be the basic pay with Dearness allowance and

   special allowance which means so far as calculation of gratuity for an

   officer is concerned, there is no break up of the definition of pay provided

   and it is the general term of "Pay" which has been used for calculating

   the gratuity. As in the case of an employee the framers of the regulation

   could have also specifically said that the calculation of gratuity for an

   officer would be one month's of basic pay and other specific allowance.

   The fact that they have not specifically held that it would be one month of

   'basic pay' rather it is one month of 'pay' means there is a deliberate and

   conscious exclusion of term 'basic pay' from Sub Clause 3 of Clause 72

   so far as officers are concerned.



21. To further put things straight it would be relevant at this juncture to refer

   to the definition of the term 'pay', 'emoluments' and 'salary' under

   Regulations 2013.



             2(m)   "Pay" means basic pay drawn per month by the officer or employee

                                       18


            in a pay scale including stagnation increments and any part of the

            emoluments which may specifically be classified as pay under these

            regulations;



        2(i) "Emoluments" means aggregate of salary and allowances, if any

        2(o)   "Salary" means aggregate of pay and dearness allowance "


22.As regards, the calculation of gratuity of an officer is concerned it is the

   terminology which has been used for quantifying the gratuity which is

   relevant. Reading of the definition of 'pay' again does not restrict itself to

   the basic pay alone. It clearly indicates that term pay includes basic pay

   of an officer including stagnation increment and is also inclusive of any

   part of the emoluments which may be specifically classified as pay

   under these regulations. This means the emoluments that an officer was

   drawing would also have to be treated as part of pay. Now what the term

   emolument means, has to be construed from the definition of

   emoluments as provided in Clause 2(i) of the Regulation of 2013.

   Clause 2(i) again while defining emoluments clearly means the

   aggregate of salary and allowances. Now to know what is the aggregate

   of salary for deciding the emoluments which could be classified as pay it

   becomes necessary for us to know the definition salary as provided

   under 2(o) of the Regulation of 2013. As per the 2(o) the term salary

   means aggregate of pay and Dearness Allowance.



23.Now from the reading of the Clause 2(i) defining emoluments and 2(o)

   defining salary, the adjective "aggregate" has been used. The term

   aggregate in common parlance means something which is formed by

   combining many. Thus, it would clearly mean that term emolument used

   in 2(m) means it is not the one singular component but a combination of

   a few or many.

                                    19


24.Now what is also to be taken note of at this juncture is that the present

  writ petition is at the third stage of litigation before reaching the High

  Court two other forums or at two other stages firstly before the

  Controlling Authority under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act
 and also before

  the Appellate Authority under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act
 the issue

  involved in the case has been considered.



25.Neither in the present bunch of writ petitions nor before the Controlling

  Authority or before the Appellate Authority the petitioners have not been

  able to show any document by it which could be established that

  Dearness Allowance firstly is not an emolument and secondly if at all if it

  is an emolument it is not one which has been specifically classified as

  pay under Regulation, 2013. The definition of pay under the Regulations

  specifically envisages that an emolument unless it may specifically be

  classified as pay under these regulations it would not be part of Pay for

  calculating Gratuity. This would clearly mean that petitioner Bank when

  they decided to pay certain emolument to officers or a category of an

  officer or an employee it would simultaneously decide whether it would

  form part of pay or not. No such document whatsoever has been

  produced by the petitioner Bank in the three stages of litigation.


26.Another aspect which needs to be considered is the fact that if the

  framers of the regulation intended that gratuity for the officer were to be

  calculated based upon their basic pay alone it would had been simply

  reflected in Sub Clause 3 of Clause 72 one month's basic pay for every

  completed year of service as is specifically mentioned in the other

  proviso of Sub clause 3 for the purpose of calculating gratuity for an

  employee. The fact that term pay has been used itself gives sufficient

                                          20


  indication that framers of the regulation intended the general term pay

  and it was not just confined to the basic pay alone. This also has to be

  seen as a deliberate exclusion of basic pay while framing sub 
Section 3
.

  In other words, the framers of the regulation had taken the term pay in

  broader perspective rather than giving it restrictive or narrow meaning

  confined to the term basic pay.



27. It is hear that judgment of the Madhya Pradesh High Court rendered by

  the Single Bench in the case of All India Gramin Bank Pensioners

  Organisation, Rewa. which needs a reference. Learned Single Bench

  of the M.P. High Court while deciding the said case in paragraph 19 to

  24 has held as under :-



        "(19) The parties are at loggerheads on the meaning of the word "pay".


           The officers contended that the word "pay" must be read with

           "emoluments" & "salary", whereas, as noticed, the employer's stand

           is that only such part of emolument can be treated as "pay" which is

           specifically classified as pay. Clause 2(m) shows that "pay" means

           basic pay of the officers/employees which includes stagnation

           increments and any part of emoluments which may specifically be

           classified as "pay" under these Regulations. The definition of

           "emoluments" shows that it is aggregate of salary and allowance.


           "Salary" includes aggregate of pay and DA.



        (20) A microscopic reading of Regulations show that there exists no

           provision whereby any part of emolument may specifically be

           classified as pay. This expression- any part of emoluments which

           specifically be classified as pay needs interpretation. In my view, a

           conjoint reading of definition of "pay", "emoluments" & "salary" is

           required for proper interpretation of the meaning of "pay" or the said

           highlighted expression. It is important to note that "emoluments" is

           aggregate of salary and allowance and "salary" is aggregate of pay

                                  21


   and dearness allowance. Thus, said three definitions are deeply

   interlinked and correct meaning of said expression can be drawn by

   combined reading of said three provisions. The definition of "pay"


   refers about emolument, whereas emolument includes salary which

   includes pay and dearness allowance. Thus, dearness allowance is

   specifically classified and must form part of pay because the said

   definitions are closely interwoven. Otherwise, expression leads to

   an absurdity and impossibility. Absurdity, inconsistency and

   impossibility because in the Regulations there exists no provision

   for undertaking such exercise of specially classifying an emolument

   as pay.



(21) The settle law is that if the grammatical construction leads to some

   absurdity or inconsistency with the rest of instruments, it may be

   departed from so as to avoid the absurdity and inconsistency.{See:

   AIR 1952 SC 324, [Shamrao vs. District Magistrate,Thana]; 1996

   (2) All ER 23, [Imperical Chemicals Industries vs.Colmer] & 2009 (
2)

   SCC 1, [Mahmadhusen Abdulrahim Kalota Shaikh v. Union of

   India
].
 
Similar view is taken by Supreme Court in AIR 1998 SC

   1070, [R. Rudraiah vs. State of Karnataka] and 
AIR 2000 SC 1261,

   [Molar Mal vs. Kay Iron Works
]}. Justice CORDOZO said "A judge

   must think of himself as an artist, who although he must know the

   handbooks, should never trust to them for his guidance; in the end

   he must rely upon his almost instinctive sense of where the line lay

   between the word and the purpose which lay behind it." {See: Mr.

   Justice Cordozo by Learned Hand, 52Harvard Law Review, pp.

   361-63}.




(22) This is trite law that statute should not be construed as theorems

   of Euclid, but it should be construed with some imagination of the

   purposes which lies behind them. It is said by Judge LEARNED

   HAND in Lehigh Valley Coal v. Yensavage, 218Fed 547, pp. 552,

   553 : 235 US 705 (1915). In the words of Justice Chhinappa Reddy,

   J "Interpretation must depend on the text and the context. They are

                                   22


   the bases of interpretation. One may well say if the text is the

   texture, context is what gives colour. Neither can be ignored. Both

   are important. That interpretation is best which makes the textual

   interpretation match the contextual. A statute is best interpreted

   when we know why it was enacted.". 
{See: 
Reserve Bank of India

   vs. Pearless General Finance and Investment Co.
,reported in 1987

   (1) SCC 424}. Iyer, J opined "to be literal in meaning is to see the

   skin and miss the soul. The judicial key to construction is the

   composite perception of 'deha' and 'dehi' of the provision."
 
{See:

   
AIR 1977 SC 965, [Chairman, Board of Mining Examination and

   Chief Inspector of Mines v. Ramjee
]}. In view of principles 
laid down

   in
 the said authorities, the definition, clauses and Regulation 72

   must be read conjointly to draw the meaning of second proviso of

   Regulation 72 and, more particularly, meaning of "last pay". As per

   the text and in the context the aforesaid expression relied upon by

   learned senior counsel is used, in my judgment "pay" includes

   dearness allowance as it exists as a classification in the definition of

   "salary" which has a direct nexus/relation with "emoluments" and

   "pay".




(23) The matter may be viewed from another angle. The provision

   relating to grant of gratuity is a beneficiary provision. It must be

   considered on the anvil of beneficent rule of construction. It is trite

   law that in the matter of welfare legislation, especially involving the

   work force, the terms of contract and the provisions of law should

   be liberally construed in favour of weak. {See: 
Workmen of Binny

   Ltd. v. Management of Binny Ltd.
, reported in 1985 (4) SCC 325;

   
Indian Bank vs. K. Usha
, reported in AIR 1998 SC 866.}.

(24) In view of aforesaid analysis, in the considered opinion of this

   Court the respondents have erred in not including DA while

   calculating gratuity under the Regulations. Thus, respondents are

   directed to include DA and recalculate the gratuity of the petitioners

   and pay the difference arising thereto to the petitioners within 60

                                           23


            days from the date of communication of this order. Since, employer

            has not taken into account the DA for calculating gratuity because

            of a genuine interpretation problem which is not based on any other

            reasons like lethargy or inaction, I am not inclined to grant interest

            on such payment of gratuity to the petitioners."


28.This judgment of the Single Bench has been further tested before the

   Division Bench of the M.P. High Court and Division Bench also has put a

   stamp of approval by dismissing the Writ Appeal. The bank had also

   challenged the two judgments before the Supreme Court in an S.L.P.

   where the S.L.P. also got dismissed in limine. The dismissal of the S.L.P.

   further makes it clear that Hon'ble Supreme Court also did not find any

   absurdity or illegality in the two judgments rendered by the M.P. High

   Court which led to the dismissal of the S.L.P. in limine.


29. From the pleadings that have been made by the petitioner-Bank and also on

   considering the submissions made on either side, what is not in dispute is the

   fact that both the petitioner as well as the respondents accept the fact that the

   officers are entitled for gratuity amount whichever is higher in between the

   calculation that is made on comparison between the two i.e. under the

   
Payments of Gratuity Act
 or under the Regulation, 2013.


30. The real controversy between the parties is as to the basis of calculation of

   the amount of gratuity payable. Since there is no upper ceiling or cap provided

   in the regulations like under the 
Payment of Gratuity Act
, the officers insisted

   that they be paid gratuity under the Regulations by including DA as a

   component within the expression Pay as defined under Clause-2M of the

   Regulations, 2013. The fact which requires consideration also is that there is

   no exclusion of DA reflected in the definition of Pay under the Regulations,

   2013. It is here that the definition of emolument becomes more relevant. The

   emolument under the definition under 2-I of the Regulations means aggregate

                                        24


   of salary and allowances and what exactly is salary is also defined under 2-O

   of the Regulations, 2013 which clearly holds that salary means aggregate Pay

   and DA.



31. What needs to be considered now under the given circumstances is, can

   expression of Pay as is reflected under the definition clause 2-M of the

   Regulations, 2013 mean inclusive of DA or excluding DA ?


32. If we read the definition Clause 2-M of the Regulations, it clearly reflects that

   the framers of the said Regulations were of the view that Pay means Basic

   Pay plus the emoluments which is classified as Pay. Now what are emolument

   which can be classified as Pay. The Bank has not produced any documentary

   proof to show what are those emoluments which according to the Bank is

   specifically classified as Pay. Under the circumstances, it becomes necessary

   to take the definition of emolument and the definition of salary together into

   consideration to decide whether the DA would be part of Pay for the purpose

   of calculating gratuity.



33. It is here that the Single Bench of MP High Court has clearly held that the

   expression Pay, Emolument and Salary are interlinked, interconnected,

   interwoven and supplementing each other. This court fully endorses the view

   taken by the Single Bench of MP High Court. The view of this court gets

   further strengthened from the plain reading of Sub Clause-3 and the three

   provisos provided under Clause-72 of the Regulations, 2013.


34. If the framers of the Regulations were of the view that for calculating gratuity

   for officers DA was not to be taken into consideration, they would have simply

   clarified it in the proviso as has been done in the case of 'employees' which is

   reflected in the 3rd proviso where in respect of an employee it has been

   specifically held that the gratuity shall be the average of basic pay plus DA

   and special allowances, whereas, so far as the officers are concerned, in the

   second proviso it has been specifically mentioned that the gratuity shall be

                                         25


   payable based upon the last pay drawn. Emphasis has been given on Pay.

   The authorities could have simply held that it would be payable on the basic

   pay and those allowances which are part of Pay under the Regulations.

   Having not done so, the term Pay would have to be given a broader and wider

   interpretation and the said interpretation should always be tilting towards the

   weaker section i.e. officers as payment of gratuity is one of those beneficial

   legislation enacted for the benefit of the employees and officers.


35. As regards the judgments of Bombay High Court which has been heavily

   relied upon by the petitioner-Bank, true it is that the Bombay High Court has

   taken a different view than what has been taken by the MP High Court. It is

   also undisputed legal position that when there are two conflicting views

   available for a court in deciding the matter and if the two conflicting views are

   of the same High Court, the option left for this court is for referring the matter

   to a larger Bench. However, in case if the conflicting views are of different

   High Courts, the Bench has an option of testing and then to endorse a view

   from among the two that which is more probable and justifiable. This court

   finds the judgment of MP High Court to be more probable in the factual matrix

   of the case. Moreover, the judgment of MP High Court has also been tested

   before the Division Bench as also before the Supreme Court and before both

   the higher forums it has got the stamp of acceptance, unlike in the case of

   Bombay High Court where it is not known whether the judgment of the

   Bombay High Court has been subjected to challenge further or not. The same

   principle also applies so far as judgment of Allahabad High Court is

   concerned.



36. There is yet another ground on which this court is reluctant to entertain the

   writ petition i.e. the scope of judicial review in exercise of the writ jurisdiction,

   while testing an order passed by the quasi judicial authorities, Tribunal and

   Labour Courts. It is settled position of law that under 
Article 226
 of the

                                         26


   Constitution of India while hearing a matter arising out of the Labour Court,

   Tribunal and Quasi Judicial Authority, the High Court does not sit as an

   appellate authority. It has only the power of superintendence over those

   Courts, Tribunals and Authorities.



37. The judicial review does not mean to re appreciate the whole dispute afresh

   and reach to a different conclusion when the authorities below has himself

   given reasons for reaching to the conclusion that he has arrived at. The

   interference by this court in exercise of its power under 
Article 226
 would

   confine itself to the extent of testing the order passed by the appellate

   authority and find out whether there is an error of jurisdiction or whether there

   is an excess of jurisdiction and also whether there is any perversity in the

   findings given by the authority whose order is under challenge.


38. The power of superintendence or the supervisory powers or the power of

   judicial review in a petition where the order of Labour Court, Quasi Judicial

   Authority or Tribunal is under challenge, has to be sparingly exercised that too

   only in the event of there being any error of law. A finding of fact arrived at with

   reasons and justification given cannot be upset only because the High Court

   finds that there is another view possible. The jurisdiction under 
Article 226


   cannot be used as revisional power or as appellate powers as the order under

   challenge does not arise out of question of violation of the fundamental rights

   or violation of any of the constitutional rights, more particularly when there are

   provision of appeal provided under the statute and the appellate authority also

   has considered these aspects in exercise of is appellate powers.


39. 
In case of 
Swaran Singh and Another Vs. State of Punjab & Others
,

   1976(2)SCC868, the Supreme Court discussing on the power of writ court

   under 
Article 226
 in paragraphs 12 and 13 has held as under :


       "12. Before dealing with the contentions canvassed, it will be
          useful to notice the general principles indicating the limits of the

                                         27


           jurisdiction of the High Court in writ proceedings under Article

           226. It is well-settled that Certiorari jurisdiction can be
           exercised only for correcting errors of jurisdiction committed by
           inferior courts of tribunals. A writ of Certiorari can be issued
           only in the exercise of supervisory jurisdiction which is different
           from appellate jurisdiction. The Court exercising special
           jurisdiction under 
Article 226
 is not entitled to act as an
           appellate Court. As was pointed out by this Court in Syed
           Yakoob's case (supra) "this limitation necessarily means that
           findings of fact reached by the inferior court or Tribunal as a
           result of the appreciation of evidence cannot be re-opened or
           questioned in writ proceedings. An error of law which is
           apparent on the face of the record can be corrected by a writ
           but not an error of fact, however grave it may appear to be."

       13. In regard to a finding of fact recorded by an inferior tribunal, a
           writ of Certiorari can be issued only if in recording such a
           finding the tribunal has acted on evidence which is legally
           inadmissible, or has refused to admit admissible evidence, or if
           the finding is not supported by any evidence at all, because in
           such cases the error amounts to an error of law. The writ
           jurisdiction extends, only to cases where orders are pissed by
           inferior courts or tribunals in excess of their jurisdiction or as a
           result of their refusal to exercise jurisdiction vested in them or
           they act illegally or improperly in the exercise of their
           jurisdiction causing grave miscarriage of justice."

40. The said principle of law has been reiterated many a times thereafter and the

   said view still holds the field.



41. 
In yet another recent decision in 
Heinz India Private Limited and Another Vs.

   State of Uttar Pradesh and Others
, 2012(5)SCC443, reiterating the same

   principle in paragraphs 66 and 67 it was held as under :


 
"66.That the Court dealing with the exercise of power of judicial

           review does not substitute its judgment for that of the

           legislature or executive or their agents as to matters within

           the province of either, and that the Court does not supplant

           'the feel of the expert' by its own review, is also fairly well-

                                        28


          settled by the decisions of this Court. In all such cases

          judicial examination is confined to finding out whether the

          findings of fact have a reasonable basis on evidence and

          whether such findings are consistent with the laws of the

          land. [See 
Union of India v. S.B. Vohra
, (
2004) 2 SCC 150,

          Shri Sitaram Sugar Co. Ltd. v. Union of India
, (1990) 3 SCC

          223, and Thansingh Nathmal and Ors. v. Supdt. of Taxes and

          Ors., Dhubri, AIR 1964 SC 1419].




      67. 
In 
Dharangadhra Chemical Works Ltd. v. State of Saurashtra

          and Ors.
, AIR 1957 SC 264, this Court held that decision of a

          Tribunal on a question of fact which it has jurisdiction to

          determine is not liable to be questioned in proceedings under

          
Article 226
 of the Constitution unless it is shown to be totally

          unsupported by any evidence.
 To the same effect is the view

          taken by this Court in Thansingh Nathmal's case (supra)

          where this Court held that the High Court does not generally

          determine questions which require an elaborate examination

          of evidence to establish the right to enforce which the writ is

          claimed."



42. This view further has been followed in 
Pepsico India Holding Private Limited

   Vs. Krishna Kant Pandey
, 2015(4)SCC 270.




43. Since the dispute involved in the present case has already been thrashed out

   before the Controlling Authority who has elaborately discussed the contentions

   put forth on either side and based on the material produced before the

   Controlling Authority has given an order which has also been affirmed by the

   appellate authority under the Act, the scope of judicial interference gets

   reduced substantially except on the ground of an error of jurisdiction or excess

   of jurisdiction which in this case is not a ground of challenge.

                                                            29


                     44. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances of the case, this court is of

                        the opinion that no strong case has been made out by the petitioners calling

                        for an interference to the impugned order under challenge.


                     45. As a consequence all these writ petitions thus being devoid of merits deserve

                        to be and are accordingly dismissed.





                                                                                       Sd/-

                                                                                  P. Sam Koshy
                                                                                      Judge
Khatai/Rohit/Inder
 

