



[Cites 
15
, Cited by 
0
]




Chattisgarh High Court


Yadvendra Singh And Ors vs State Of Chhattisgarh And Ors on 19 July, 2024


   Neutral Citation
   2024:CGHC:26151




                                 1




                                                                 NAFR
            HIGH COURT OF CHHATTISGARH, BILASPUR
                           WPS No.2350 of 2014
   1. Yadvendra Singh Shri Awadh Bihari Aged About 55 Years Subedar
      M, Working Under The Office Of Police Head Quarter, General
      Branch Raipur, Ps Civil Line, Distt Raipur, Cg, Chhattisgarh
   2. S.P.Shukla S/o Lt Shri Shivnath Prasad Shukla Aged About 58
      Years Subedar M, Working Under The Office Of Police Head
      Quarter, General Branch Raipur, Ps Civil Line, Distt Raipur, Cg,
      District : Raipur, Chhattisgarh
   3. Ravindra Ongale S/o Shri T.M.Ongale Aged About 56 Years
      Subedar M, Working Under The Office Of Police Head Quarter,
      General Branch Raipur, Ps Civil Line, Distt Raipur, Cg, District :
      Raipur, Chhattisgarh
   4. L.N.Sharma S/o Shri S.B.Sharma Aged About 54 Years Subedar
      M, Working Under The Office Of Police Head Quarter, General
      Branch Raipur, Ps Civil Line, Distt Raipur, Cg, District : Raipur,
      Chhattisgarh
                                                        ---- Petitioners
                                Versus
   1. State Of Chhattisgarh Through Secretary, Home Affairs, Police
      Department, Mahanadi Bhawan,new Mantralaya, Raipur, Dist
      Raipur, Cg, Chhattisgarh
   2. The Director General Of Police Police Head Quarters, Raipur, Dist
      Raipur, Cg, District : Raipur, Chhattisgarh
   3. The Secretary, General Administration Department, Police Head
      Quarters, Raipur, Dist Raipur, Cg, District : Raipur, Chhattisgarh
   4. (Deleted) A.P.Tripathi (Died) As Per Honble Court Order Dated 11-
      06-2024.
   5. Smt. Meena Naranvare Subedar M, Working Under The Office Of
      Police Head Quarter, General Branch Raipur, Ps Civil Line, Distt
      Raipur, Cg, District : Raipur, Chhattisgarh
                                                     ---- Respondents


For Petitioners       : Mr. Shayon Kar, Advocate holding the brief of
                        Mr. Prakash Tiwari, Advocate
For State             : Ms. Nupoor Sonkar, Panel Lawyer

             Hon'ble Shri Justice Rakesh Mohan Pandey
                          Order on Board
19.07.2024
 Neutral Citation
2024:CGHC:26151





                                2





   Heard.



1. The petitioners have filed this petition seeking the following

  relief(s):-



      "10.1 "The Hon'ble Court may kindly be pleased to
      call for the entire records pertaining to the promotion
      case of the petitioners for its kind perusal.
      10.2 The Hon'ble Court may kindly be pleased to set
      aside the order impugned dated 01.02.2014
      (Annexure P/1) issued by the respondent No.2.
      10.3 That, the Hon'ble Court may kindly be pleased to
      direct the respondent authorities, particularly the
      respondent No.2 to consider the name of the
      petitioners for their next promotion to the post of
      Subedar (M) w.e.f. 2005 instead of 2009 with all
      consequential benefits.

      10.4 That, the Hon'ble Court may kindly be pleased to
      direct the respondent authorities, particularly the
      respondent No.2 to recall the gradation list issued for
      the year 2013(Annexure P/8) and place the name of
      the petitioners in pursuance to the gradation list of
      2003 (Annexure P/7).

      10.5 That, the Hon'ble Court may kindly be pleased to
      direct the respondent authorities, particularly the
      respondent No.2 place the name of respondents No.4
      & 5 at the fag end of the gradation list in view of GOP
      No.55 (Annexure P/2) and Rule 2005 (Annexure P/4).
      10.6 That, the Hon'ble Court may kindly be pleased to
      grant any other relief, as if may deem fit and
      appropriate.

      10.7 Cost of the petition may also be given."



2. Mr. Kar, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners

  submitted that the petitioners were holding the post of Sub-



  Inspector (M) under the Police Head Quarter, General Branch,

  Raipur in the year 2005. He further submitted that respondents No.
 Neutral Citation
2024:CGHC:26151





                               3





  4 & 5 were juniors to the petitioners who were promoted to the

  post of Subedar (M) and the candidature of the petitioners was not

  considered by the Departmental Promotion Committee for the

  reasons best known to it. He also submitted that the petitioners

  were promoted to the post of Subedar (M) in the year 2009 and a

  seniority list was published in the year 2013, then they came to

  know that they had been placed below respondents No. 4 & 5 in

  the gradation list. He further argued that the petitioners are entitled

  to get the seniority and consequential benefits from the year 2005

  when respondents No. 4 & 5 were promoted.



3. On the other hand, Ms. Sonkar, the learned Panel Lawyer

  appearing for the State would oppose the submissions made by

  Mr. Kar. Ms. Sonkar submitted that respondents No. 4 & 5 were

  transferred to the State of Chhattisgarh on the mutual ground and

  thereafter, the seniority list was published. She further submitted

  that respondents No. 4 & 5 were promoted to the post of Subedar

  (M) in the year 2005 but no action was taken by the petitioners. In

  the year 2009, the petitioners were also promoted to the post of

  Subedar (M). She also submitted that the gradation list was

  published in the year 2005 and thereafter, in the year 2009, and

  the subsequent gradation list was published in the year 2013. She

  further argued that the petitioners have approached this Court

  claiming therein seniority from the year 2005 when respondents

  No. 4 & 5 were promoted. She also stated that the claim of the
 Neutral Citation
2024:CGHC:26151





                                 4





   petitioners is stale as the instant petition has been filed after a

   lapse of nine years without explaining the reasons for the delay.



4. I have heard learned counsel appearing for the parties and

   perused the documents placed on record.



5. In the present petition, the petitioners have not pleaded when they

   were appointed and when respondents No. 4 & 5 were promoted

   to the post of Subedar (M). Even the date of the meeting of DPC

   has not been pleaded in the instant writ petition. Admittedly,

   respondents No. 4 & 5 were promoted to the post of Subedar (M)

   in the year 2005. It is pleaded that respondents No. 4 & 5 were

   transferred to the State of Chhattisgarh after the reorganization of

   the State of Chhattisgarh by mutual consent, therefore, they

   should have been placed below the petitioners in the gradation list.



   The contention raised by the learned counsel appearing for the

   petitioners appears to be reasonable but the petitioners failed to

   challenge the gradation list as well as the order of promotion which

   was passed in the year 2005. After the year 2005, the petitioners

   were promoted to the post of Subedar (M) in the year 2009. In the

   year 2014, the present petition was filed claiming therein seniority

   from the year 2005.



6. The   Hon'ble   Supreme     Court   in   the   matter   of   
Chennai

   Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Board and Others

   Vs. T.T. Murali Babu
 reported in (2014) 4 SCC 108 held as
 Neutral Citation
2024:CGHC:26151





                                    5





   under:-




               '17. In the case at hand, though there has been four
             years' delay in approaching the court, yet the writ court
             chose not to address the same. It is the duty of the court
             to scrutinize whether such enormous delay is to be
             ignored without any justification. That apart, in the
             present case, such belated approach gains more
             significance as the respondent employee being
             absolutely careless to his duty and nurturing a
             lackadaisical attitude to the responsibility had remain
             unauthorizedly absent on the pretext of some kind of ill
             health. We repeat at the cost of repetition that remaining
             innocuously oblivious to such delay does not foster the
             cause of justice. On the contrary, it brings in injustice, for
             it is likely to affect others. Such delay may have impact
             on others' ripened rights and may unnecessarily drag
             others into litigation which in acceptable realm of
             probability, may have been treated to have attained
             finality. A court is not expected to give indulgence to such
             indolent persons -who compete with "Kumbhakarna" or
             for that matter "Rip Van Winkle" . In our considered
             opinion, such delay does not deserve any indulgence and
             on the said ground alone the writ court should have
             thrown the petition overboard at the very threshold.



7. Recently,     the    Apex    Court     in   the   matter     of   
Rushibhai

   Jagdishbhai Pathak Vs. Bhavnagar Municipal Corporation


   reported in 2022 SCC Online SC 64 held as under:-




             '9. The doctrine of delay and laches, or for that matter
             statutes of limitation, are considered to be statutes of
             repose and statutes of peace, though some contrary
             opinions have been expressed (in Nav Rattanmal Vs.
             state of Rajasthan, AIR 1961 SC 1704). The courts have
             expressed the view that the law of limitation rests on the
             foundations of greater public interest for three reasons,
             namely, (a) that long dormant claims have more of
             cruelty than justice in them; (b) that a defendant might
             have lost the evidence to disapprove a stale claim; and

 
(iii) that persons with good causes of action (who are
             able to enforce them) should pursue them with
             reasonable diligence (
State of Kerala Vs. V.R.
             Kalliyanikutty
, (1999) 3 SCC 657 relying on Halsbury's
             Laws of England, 4th Edn., Vol. 28, para 605; Halsbury's
             Laws of England , Vol. 68 (2021) para 1005. Equally,
             change in de facto position or character, creation of third
             party rights over a period of time, waiver, acquiesce, and
             need to ensure certitude in dealings, are equitable public
 Neutral Citation
2024:CGHC:26151





                                    6





           policy considerations why period of limitation is
           prescribed by law. Law of limitation does not apply to
           writ petitions, albeit the discretion vested with a
           constitutional court is exercised with caution as delay
           and laches principle is applied with the aim to secure the
           quiet of the community, suppress fraud and perjury,
           quicken diligence, and prevent oppression.
(see 
Popat
           and Kotecha Property Vs. State Bank of India Staff
           Association
 (2005) 7 SCC 510).Therefore, some
           decisions and judgments do not look upon pleas of delay
           and laches with favour, especially and rightly in cases
           where the persons suffer from adeptness, or incapacity
           to approach the courts for relief. However, other
           decisions, while accepting the rules of limitation as well
           as delay and laches, have observed that such rules are
           not meant to destroy the rights of the parties but serve a
           larger public interest and are founded on public policy.


 
There must be a lifespan during which a person must
           approach the court for their remedy. Otherwise, there
           would be unending uncertainty as to the rights and
           obligations of the parties. (See 
N. Blarkrishnan Vs. M.
           Krishnamurthy
, (1998)7 SCC 123.
 Referring to the
           principle of delay and laches, this Court, way back in
           Moons Mils Ltd Vs. M.R. Mehar, President, Industrial
           Court, Bombay AIR 1967 SC 1450, had referred to the
           view expressed by Sir Barnes Peacock in The Lindsay
           Petroleum Company and Prosper Armstrong Hurd,
           Abram Farewell, and John Kemp, (L.R.) 5 P.C.221 in the
           following words:

           " Now the doctrine of laches in Courts of Equity is not an
           arbitrary or a technical doctrine, Where it would be
           practically unjust to give a remedy, either because the
           party has, by his conduct, done that which might fairly be
           regarded as equivalent to a waiver of it, or where by this
           conduct and neglect he has though perhaps not waiving
           that remedy, yet put the other party in a situation in
           which it would not be reasonable to place him if the
           remedy were afterwards to be asserted, in either of
           these cases, lapse of time and delay are most material.
           But in every case,if an argument against relief, which
           otherwise would be just, is founded upon mere delay,
           that delay of course not amounting to a bar by any
           statute of limitations, the validity of that defence must be
           tried upon principles substantially equitable. Two
           circumstances, always important in such cases, are, the
           length of the delay and the nature of the acts done
           during the interval, which might affect either party and
           cause a balance of justice or injustice in taking the one
           course or the other, so far as relates to the remedy."

 Neutral Citation
2024:CGHC:26151





                                   7


8. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of 
Bichitrananda

  Behera Vs. State of Orissa and others
 reported in 2023 Livelaw

  (SC) 883, under relevant para 21 held as under:-




         "21. Profitably, we may reproduce                   relevant
         passagesfrom certain decisions of this Court:

 
(
A) Union of India v Tarsem Singh
, (2008) 8 SCC 648:


         "To summarise, normally, a belated service related claim
         will be rejected on the ground of delay and laches
         (where remedy is sought by filing a writ petition) or
         limitation (where remedy is sought by an application to
         the Administrative Tribunal). One of the exceptions to
         the said rule is cases relating to a continuing wrong.
         Where a service related claim is based on a continuing
         wrong, relief can be granted even if there is a long delay
         in seeking remedy, with reference to the date on which
         the continuing wrong commenced, if such continuing
         wrong creates a continuing source of injury. But there is
         an exception to the exception. If the grievance is in
         respect of any order or administrative decision which
         related to or affected several others also, and if the
         reopening of the issue would affect the settled rights of
         third parties, then the claim will not be entertained. For
         example, if the issue relates to payment or refixation of
         pay or pension, relief may be granted in spite of delay
         as it does not affect the rights of third parties. But if the
         claim involved issues relating to seniority or promotion,
         etc., affecting others, delay would render the claim stale
         and doctrine of laches/limitation will be applied. Insofar
         as the consequential relief of recovery of arrears for a
         past period is concerned, the principles relating to
         recurring/successive wrongs will apply. As a
         consequence, the High Courts will restrict the
         consequential relief relating to arrears normally to a
         period of three years prior to the date of filing of the writ
         petition." (emphasis supplied)
         (B) Union of India v N Murugesan, (2022) 2 SCC 25:

         "Delay, laches and acquiescence

         20. The principles governing delay, laches, and
         acquiescence are overlapping and interconnected on
         many occasions. However, they have their distinct
         characters and distinct elements. One can say that
         delay is the genus to which laches and acquiescence
         are species. Similarly, laches might be called a genus to
         a species by name acquiescence. However, there may
         be a case where acquiescence is involved, but not
 Neutral Citation
2024:CGHC:26151





                                     8





         laches. These principles are common law principles,
         and perhaps one could identify that these principles find
         place in various statutes which restrict the period of
         limitation and create non consideration of condonation
         in certain circumstances. They are bound to be applied
         by way of practice requiring prudence of the court than
         of a strict application of law. The underlying principle
         governing these concepts would be one of estoppel.
         The question of prejudice is also an important issue to
         be taken note of by the court.

         Laches

         21. The word "laches" is derived from the French
         language meaning "remissness and slackness". It thus
         involves unreasonable delay or negligence in pursuing
         a claim involving an equitable relief while causing
         prejudice to the other party. It is neglect on the part of a
         party to do an act which law requires while asserting a
         right, and therefore, must stand in the way of the party
         getting relief or remedy.

         22. Two essential factors to be seen are the length of
         the delay and the nature of acts done during the
         interval. As stated, it would also involve acquiescence
         on the part of the party approaching the court apart from
         the change in position in the interregnum. Therefore, it
         would be unjustifiable for a Court of Equity to confer a
         remedy on a party who knocks its doors when his acts
         would indicate a waiver of such a right. By his conduct,
         he has put the other party in a particular position, and
         therefore, it would be unreasonable to facilitate a
         challenge before the court. Thus, a man responsible for
         his conduct on equity is not expected to be allowed to
         avail a remedy.

         23. A defence of laches can only be allowed when there
         is no statutory bar. The question as to whether there
         exists a clear case of laches on the part of a person
         seeking a remedy is one of fact and so also that of
         prejudice. The said principle may not have any
         application when the existence of fraud is pleaded and
         proved by the other side. To determine the difference
         between the concept of laches and acquiescence is
         that, in a case involving mere laches, the principle of
         estoppel would apply to all the defences that are
         available to a party. Therefore, a defendant can
         succeed on the various grounds raised by the plaintiff,
         while an issue concerned alone would be amenable to
         acquiescence.

         Acquiescence

         24. We have already discussed the relationship
 Neutral Citation
2024:CGHC:26151





                                   9





         between acquiescence on the one hand and delay and
         laches on the other.

         25. Acquiescence would mean a tacit or passive
         acceptance. It is implied and reluctant consent to an
         act. In other words, such an action would qualify a
         passive assent. Thus, when acquiescence takes place,
         it presupposes knowledge against a particular act. From
         the knowledge comes passive acceptance, therefore
         instead of taking any action against any alleged refusal
         to perform the original contract, despite adequate
         knowledge of its terms, and instead being allowed to
         continue by consciously ignoring it and thereafter
         proceeding further, acquiescence does take place. As a
         consequence, it reintroduces a new implied agreement
         between the parties. Once such a situation arises, it is
         not open to the party that acquiesced itself to insist
         upon the compliance of the original terms. Hence, what
         is essential, is the conduct of the parties. We only dealt
         with the distinction involving a mere acquiescence.
         When acquiescence is followed by delay, it may
         become laches. Here again, we are inclined to hold that
         the concept of acquiescence is to be seen on a case-to-
         case basis." (emphasis supplied)
         (C) Chairman, State Bank of India v M J James, (2022)
         2 SCC 301:

         "36. What is a reasonable time is not to be put in a
         straitjacket formula or judicially codified in the form of
         days, etc. as it depends upon the facts and
         circumstances of each case. A right not exercised for a
         long time is nonexistent. Doctrine of delay and laches
         as well as acquiescence are applied to non-suit the
         litigants who approach the court/appellate authorities
         belatedly without any justifiable explanation for bringing
         action after unreasonable delay. In the present case,
         challenge to the order of dismissal from service by way
         of appeal was after four years and five months, which is
         certainly highly belated and beyond justifiable time.
         Without satisfactory explanation justifying the delay, it is
         difficult to hold that the appeal was preferred within a
         reasonable time. Pertinently, the challenge was
         primarily on the ground that the respondent was not
         allowed to be represented by a representative of his
         choice. The respondent knew that even if he were to
         succeed on this ground, as has happened in the writ
         proceedings, fresh inquiry would not be prohibited as
         finality is not attached unless there is a legal or statutory
         bar, an aspect which has been also noticed in the
         impugned judgment. This is highlighted to show the
         prejudice caused to the appellants by the delayed
         challenge. We would, subsequently, examine the
 Neutral Citation
2024:CGHC:26151





                                    10





         question of acquiescence and its judicial effect in the
         context of the present case.

         Xxx

         38. 
In 
Ram Chand v. Union of India [Ram Chand
 v.
         Union of India, (1994) 1 SCC 44] and State of U.P. v.
         Manohar [State of U.P. v. Manohar, (2005) 2 SCC 126]
         this Court observed that if the statutory authority has not
         performed its duty within a reasonable time, it cannot
         justify the same by taking the plea that the person who
         has been deprived of his rights has not approached the
         appropriate forum for relief. If a statutory authority does
         not pass any orders and thereby fails to comply with the
         statutory mandate within reasonable time, they normally
         should not be permitted to take the defence of laches
         and delay.
 
If at all, in such cases, the delay furnishes a
         cause of action, which in some cases as elucidated in
         
Union of India v. Tarsem Singh [Union of India
 v. Tarsem
         Singh, (2008) 8 SCC 648 : (2008) 2 SCC (L&S) 765]
         may be continuing cause of action.The State being a
         virtuous litigant should meet the genuine claims and not
         deny them for want of action on their part. However, this
         general principle would not apply when, on
         consideration of the facts, the court concludes that the
         respondent had abandoned his rights, which may be
         either express or implied from his conduct.


Abandonment implies intentional act to acknowledge,
         as has been held in para 6 of Motilal Padampat Sugar
         Mills Co. Ltd. v. State of U.P. [Motilal Padampat Sugar
         Mills Co. Ltd. v. State of U.P., (1979) 2 SCC 409 : 1979
         SCC (Tax) 144] Applying this principle of acquiescence
         to the precept of delay and laches, this Court in U.P. Jal
         Nigam v.Jaswant 
Singh [U.P. Jal Nigam v. Jaswant
         Singh
, (2006) 11 SCC 464 : (2007) 1 SCC (L&S) 500]
         after referring to several judgments, has accepted the
         following elucidation in Halsbury's Laws of England :


 
(
Jaswant Singh
 case [
U.P. Jal Nigam v. Jaswant Singh
,
         (2006) 11 SCC 464 : (2007) 1 SCC (L&S) 500] , SCC
         pp. 470-71, paras 1213)
         "12. The statement of law has also been summarised in
         Halsbury's Laws of England, Para 911,p. 395 as follows:


         'In determining whether there has been such delay as to
         amount to laches, the chief points to be considered are:

         (i) acquiescence on the claimant's part;and

         (ii) any change of position that has occurred on the
         defendant's part.

         Acquiescence in this sense does not mean standing by
         while the violation of a right is in progress,but assent
 Neutral Citation
2024:CGHC:26151





                                 11





         after the violation has been completed and the claimant
         has become aware of it. It is unjust to give the claimant
         a remedy where, by his conduct, he has done that
         which might fairly be regarded as equivalent to a waiver
         of it; or where by his conduct and neglect, though not
         waiving the remedy, he has put the other party in a
         position in which it would not be reasonable to place
         him if the remedy were afterwards to be asserted. In
         such cases lapse of time and delay are most material.
         Upon these considerations rests the doctrine of laches.'

         13. In view of the statement of law as summarised
         above, the respondents are guilty since the respondents
         have acquiesced in accepting the retirement and did not
         challenge the same in time. If they would have been
         vigilant enough, they could have filed writ petitions as
         others did in the matter. Therefore, whenever it appears
         that the claimants lost time or whiled it away and did not
         rise to the occasion in time for filing the writ petitions,
         then in such cases, the court should be very slow in
         granting the relief to the incumbent. Secondly, it has
         also to be taken into consideration the question of
         acquiescence or waiver on the part of the incumbent
         whether other parties are going to be prejudiced if the
         relief is granted. In the present case, if the respondents
         would have challenged their retirement being violative
         of the provisions of the Act, perhaps the Nigam could
         have taken appropriate steps to raise funds so as to
         meet the liability but by not asserting their rights the
         respondents have allowed time to pass and after a
         lapse of couple of years, they have filed writ petitions
         claiming the benefit for two years. That will definitely
         require the Nigam to raise funds which is going to have
         serious financial repercussions on the financial
         management of the Nigam. Why should the court come
         to the rescue of such persons when they themselves
         are guilty of waiver and acquiescence?"

 
39. Before proceeding further, it is important to clarify
         distinction between "acquiescence" and "delay and
         laches". Doctrine of acquiescence is an equitable
         doctrine which applies when a party having a right
         stands by and sees another dealing in a manner
         inconsistent with that right, while the act is in progress
         and after violation is completed, which conduct reflects
         his assent or accord. He cannot afterwards complain.
         [See 
Prabhakar v. Sericulture Deptt.
, (2015) 15 SCC 1 :


 
(2016) 2 SCC (L&S) 149. Also, see 
Gobinda Ramanuj
         Das Mohanta v. Ram Charan Das
, 1925 SCC OnLine
         Cal 30 : AIR 1925 Cal 1107] In literal sense, the term
         acquiescence means silent assent, tacit consent,
         concurrence, or acceptance, [See Vidyavathi Kapoor
 Neutral Citation
2024:
CGHC:26151





                                   12





         Trust v. CIT
, 1991 SCC OnLine Kar 331 : (1992) 194
         ITR 584] which denotes conduct that is evidence of an
         intention of a party to abandon an equitable right and
         also to denote conduct from which another party will be
         justified in inferring such an intention.
 
[See 
Krishan Dev
         v. Ram Piari
, 1964 SCC OnLine HP 5 : AIR 1964 HP 34]
         Acquiescence can be either direct with full knowledge
         and express approbation, or indirect where a person
         having the right to set aside the action stands by and
         sees another dealing in a manner inconsistent with that
         right and in spite of the infringement takes no action
         mirroring acceptance. [See "Introduction", U.N. Mitra,
         Tagore Law Lectures -- Law of Limitation and
         Prescription, Vol. I, 14th Edn., 2016.] However,
         acquiescence will not apply if lapse of time is of no
         importance or consequence.


         40. Laches unlike limitation is flexible. However, both
         limitation and laches destroy the remedy but not the
         right. Laches like acquiescence is based upon equitable
         considerations, but laches unlike acquiescence imports
         even simple passivity. On the other hand, acquiescence
         implies active assent and is based upon the rule of
         estoppel in pais. As a form of estoppel, it bars a party
         afterwards from complaining of the violation of the right.
         
Even indirect acquiescence implies almost active
         consent, which is not to be inferred by mere silence or
         inaction which is involved in laches. Acquiescence in
         this manner is quite distinct from delay. Acquiescence
         virtually destroys the right of the person. [See
         
Vidyavathi Kapoor Trust v. CIT
, 1991 SCC OnLine Kar
         331 : (1992) 194 ITR 584] Given the aforesaid legal
         position, inactive acquiescence on the part of the
         respondent can be inferred till the filing of the appeal,
         and not for the period post filing of the appeal.
         Nevertheless, this acquiescence being in the nature of
         estoppel bars the respondent from claiming violation of
         the right of fair representation."




9. It is the duty of the court to scrutinize whether such enormous

  delay is to be ignored without any justification. Remaining

  innocuously oblivious to such delay does not foster the cause of

  justice. On the contrary, it brings in injustice, for it is likely to affect

  others. Such delay may have impact on others' ripened rights and

  may unnecessarily drag others into litigation which in acceptable
         Neutral Citation
        2024:CGHC:26151





                                       13





          realm of probability, may have been treated to have attained

          finality. A court is not expected to give indulgence to such indolent

          persons, such delay does not deserve any indulgence and on the

          said ground alone this Court deems it appropriate to dismiss this

          petition at the very threshold. The doctrine of delay and laches, or

          for that matter statutes of limitation are considered to be statutes of

          repose and statutes of peace. There must be a lifespan during

          which a person must approach the court for their remedy.



          Otherwise, there would be unending uncertainty as to the rights

          and obligations of the parties.



 
10.Considering the facts and circumstances of the present case in

          light of the judgments passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the

          matters of 
Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply
 (supra),

          
Rushibhai Jagdishbhai Pathak
 (supra) and 
Bichitrananda

          Behera
 (supra), it is quite vivid that the petitioners have

          approached this Court after a delay of 9 years and in para 7 of the

          writ petition, they have stated that there is no delay in filing the

          instant petition. The petitioners utterly failed to explain the delay

          caused in filing the instant petition, therefore, in the considered

          opinion of this Court, this petition is liable to be and is hereby

          dismissed on account of delay and laches. No costs.




                                                         Sd/-

                                                 (Rakesh Mohan Pandey)
                                                         Judge
Rekha
 

