Bangalore District Court

Smt. Neela vs No.1 To 3 Being Minors on 29 February, 2016

IN THE COURT OF THE XI ADDL.CITY CIVIL JUDGE,
BANGALORE CITY

Dated this the 29th day of February 2016.

PRESENT: S.V.KULKARNI, B.Com., LLB(Spl)
XI Addl.City Civil Judge, B'lore city.

O.S.No.7080 of 2009
C.C.H.8

Plaintiff/s: 1 Smt. Neela,
W/o Late K. Chandra,
Aged about 37 years,

2 Sri. Murugesh,
S/o Late K. Chandra,
Aged about 20 years,

3 Sri. Vinayaka,
S/o Late K. Chandra,
Aged about 19 years,

All are residing at Behind Vyalikaval
Police Station, Bengaluru.

(By Sri. S.R.Sundar Ram., Advocate)

-Vrs-
Plaintiff/s: 1 Kum. C.Gayathri,
D/o Late K. Cchandra,
Aged 12 years,

2 Kum. C.Bhavani,
D/o Late K. Chandra,
2 OS. No.7080 of 2009

Aged 9 years,

3 Chi. Seena,
S/o Late K. Chandra,
Aged about 3 years,

Defendant No.1 to 3 being minors,
represented by their mother and natural
guardian Smt. Vennila, No.14/3, I cross,
Muneshwara Block, Palace Guttahalli,
Bengaluru.

(By Sri. N.K.Kantharaju, Advocate)

Date of the institution of suit: 02/11/2009
Nature of the suit: Partition and separate
possession

Date of the commencement of 14/2/2011
recording of the evidence :
Date on which the judgment 29/2/2016
was pronounced :
Total duration: Year/s Month/s Day/s
06 03 27

XI Addl.City Civil Judge,
B'lore city.
3 OS. No.7080 of 2009

JUDGMENT

Plaintiffs have filed this suit seeking the relief of
partition and separate possession of the alleged ½ share in
the suit schedule properties and to put them in their
possession of their respective share and costs of the suit.

2. The suit schedule property as per schedule is as
under:

All that piece and parcel of property bearing No.14/3, I
cross, Muneshwara Block, P.G Halli Bengaluru coming under
the jurisdiction of Malleshwaram Zone, measuring east to
west:12.6feet north to south: 40 feet totally measuring 500
sq, ft., bounded on the
East: Private property
West: Subramani & his children property
North: Road
South: property No.55.

3. The case of the plaintiff as stated in the plaint
averments briefly stated a follows:-

Plaintiffs are the legal heirs of late K. Chandra, wherein
1st plaintiff is the legally wedded wife of K. Chandra, plaintiffs
No.2 and 3 are the sons of late K.Chandra, born out of
wedlock between 1st plaintiff and late K. Chandra. It is

4 OS. No.7080 of 2009

alleged that, late K. Chandra illegally get married to one Smt.
Vennila and through her, he has three children who are
defendants and they are represented by their mother Smt.
Vennila K. Chandra died on 24/10/2002.

It is further alleged that, during life time of K. Chandra,
there was partition effected between K. Chandra, his mother
and his brothers on 8/2/2002 wherein property bearing
No.14/3, I cross, Muneshwara Block was partitioned amongst
them and as per the said partition, K. Chandra and the
illegitimate children ie., defendants were allotted 'B' schedule
property in the said partition deed and their share is property
bearing No. 14/3, I cross, Muneshwara Block, P.G.Halli,
Bengaluru measuring about 12.6 feet X 40 feet morefully
described in the schedule and this property hereinafter
referred as suit schedule property. Plaintiffs alleged that,
they have not been made as parties to the said partition deed.

It is alleged that, suit schedule property was the self-
acquired property of grand-father of plaintiffs No.2 and 3
herein. As such they are also entitled for equal share in the
suit property along with their father. For obvious reasons,
these plaintiffs were not made as parties to the said partition
of the year 2002. Plaintiff No.2 and 3 father died on
24/10/2007 and the plaintiffs are legal heirs of K. Chandra
are entitled for the half share in the suit schedule property.
After the death of K. Chandra, these plaintiffs approached the

5 OS. No.7080 of 2009

defendants' mother and sought for division of suit schedule
property. But, defendants mother refused to effect partition
and to allot any share. But, their request was turned down
by her instead abused the plaintiffs and even threatened
them of dire consequences if they claim any share in the suit
schedule property. Plaintiffs alleged that the marriage of K.
Chandra with Smt.Vennila is illegal and the said marriage
has taken place during the subsistence of marriage between
plaintiff and deceased K. Chandra.

The plaintiff alleged that they being legal heirs of late
K.Chandra are entitled for equal share in the suit schedule
property. Though the defendants are illegitimate children,
since their rights are protected under
section 16
of Hindu
Marriage Act 1955, plaintiffs do not want to define the
declaration of their half share in the suit schedule property
though defendants are appraised about the above aspect.
But, defendants mother not heeded their request and she
denied the legitimate claim of plaintiffs and had thrown the
challenge that no cost they would part the property to the
plaintiffs.

The plaintiffs and defendants are entitled for 1/6th
share each in the suit schedule property. As such being the
case, the plaintiffs together are entitled for half share so also
the defendants together are entitled for half share in the suit

6 OS. No.7080 of 2009

schedule property as per
section 6
&
of Hindu Succession
Act.

The plaintiffs have alleged cause of action to file this
suit arose when the defendants have partitioned the property
in the absence of defendants and suit schedule property after
the death of K. Chandra on 24/10/2007 and when
defendants denied of their due share in the suit schedule
property. Hence, plaintiff claiming to be legal heirs of late K.
Chandra have filed this suit for partition and separate
possession.

4. Defendants' Minor guardian mother Smt. Vennila
appeared and filed her written statement contending that suit
is not maintainable either in law and facts. The first plaintiff
is not legally wedded wife of late K. Chandra who died on
24/10/2007 and the first plaintiff has not produced any
evidence to show that her marriage was held with deceased
Late K.Chandra. Plaintiffs are not the coparceners and the
suit for partition is not maintainable. Plaintiffs have to
establish that they belong to joint family and suit schedule
property is joint family property. She contended that if really
the plaintiffs were joint family members, they could not be
from the partition . Plaintiffs have not questioned the
legality of the registered partition deed dated 8.8.2002 and
all the joint family properties were not included in this suit.

7 OS. No.7080 of 2009

Thus the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties.
Suit for partial partition is not maintainable. If the plaintiffs
were dispossessed from the joint family, the only remedy
available for the plaintiffs to sue for possession and suit for
partition is not maintainable. Suit is barred by registered
partition deed dated 8.8.2002. The suit is filed by plaintiffs is
an abuse of the process of law with an intention of harassing
defendants. It is contended further that execution of
registered partition deed dated 8.8.2002, the father of
defendant No.1 to 3 died on 24.10.2007 and their mother
Smt. Vennila appointed as a minor guardian.. Further
defendants filed application before BBMP requesting for
transfer of khatha in their name and BBMP considering the
request of the defendants, katha is changed in their name
and they are paying tax to the suit schedule property.
Hence, defendants are in lawful possession and enjoyment
over the suit schedule property. The plaintiffs are totally
strangers had no manner of right, title and interest over
the suit schedule property. Defendants have denied the
status of the plaintiffs that they are LRs of deceased
K.Chandrashekar and 1st plaintiff is legally wedded wife of
late K.Chandrashekar. The mother of defendants Smt.
Vennila had got married to late K.Chandrashekar on
19.6.1994 at Sri Valle Malai Vellore Anbargal Chouldri at
Vellore as per Hindu Rites and Customs. Out of wed-lock,

8 OS. No.7080 of 2009

defendants have born . Defendants are Class-I heirs of
deceased K.Chandrashekar. The defendants have pleaded in
re-para No.3 regarding registered partition deed dated
8.8.2002 held between Smt. Savithramma and sons of
deceased M. Subramani and late Chandra and defendants.
The defendants have specifically denied the allegations
averred in para No.4 to 8 that the suit is vexatious and court
fee paid is not sufficient and there is no cause of action.
Hence defendants on this defense contested this suit filed by
the plaintiffs and pray for dismissal of the suit.

4. Based upon these pleadings, the following issues
are framed for trial of the suit :-

1. Whether the plaintiffs prove that plaintiff
No.1 is the wife of late K.Chandra and
plaintiff No.2 and 3 are the sons of late
K.Chandra through the plaintiff?

2. Whether the plaintiffs prove that they are
entitled for ½ share in the suit schedule
property?

3. Whether the defendants prove that plaintiffs
are not the coparceners, therefore, suit for
partition is not maintainable?

4. Whether the defendants prove that suit of
the plaintiffs is barred by limitation?

9 OS. No.7080 of 2009

5. Whether the plaintiffs are entitled for the
relief of partition and separate possession of
their share from suit schedule property?

6. To what order or decree?

5. In order to prove the above issues, the parties to the
suit have lead their oral and documentary evidence wherein
1st plaintiff is examined as P.W.1 and got marked Ex.P.1 to
P.7 and closed her side and on behalf of defendants, their
mother is examined as D.W.1 and Ex.D.1 to Ex.D.22 are
marked and closed her side and thereafter, this case is
posted for arguments.

6. Counsel for plaintiff filed written arguments and
heard the arguments of advocate for defendants and posted
the suit for judgment.

Counsel for defendants relied upon citation reported in
AIR 1993 Supreme Court 957 in the case of
Vinay Krishna
Vs. Keshav Chandra and another
. I have perused the
ratio

laid down in
this decision. Apex Court has discussed
Sec. 42

of Specific Relief Act. Suit for declaration of share in property

- Plaintiff was not in exclusive possession of property because
two other persons and also tenants were in occupation-Failure
of plaintiff to claim relief of possession-Discretion of court in
granting decree for declaration and possession is barred.

10 OS. No.7080 of 2009

And another decision reported in 2008(4) KCCR 2333
(DB) ( M.Prithviraj and others Vs. Smt. Leelamma.N and others)

- Hindu Law-Long spell of living together -Man and woman
presumption of marriage- It is a rebuttable presumption.

7. During pendency of suit, 1st defendant has attained
majority and defendants have filed I.A.No.12 on 22.4.2015 and
after hearing I.A.No. 12 came to be allowed on 21.2.2015 and
1st defendant is permitted to prosecute this suit in her own
capacity and guardianship of her mother is discharged.

8. On appreciation of the pleadings and oral evidence
and documentary evidence placed on record by both parties
and considering the arguments addressed by the respective
counsel and on perusal of decisions cited herein by the counsel
for defendants, I answer the above issues are as follows:-

Issue No.1: In affirmative
Issue No.2: In affirmative
Issue No.3: In negative
Issue No.4: In negative
Issue No.5: In affirmative
Issue No.6: Suit of the plaintiff deserves to
be decreed against defendants in
respect of suit schedule property

11 OS. No.7080 of 2009

without any order as to costs for
the following:

REASONS

9. Issue No.1to 3 :- Since these issues are main issues
to be considered by this court in view of pleadings filed by
both parties and hence, issue No.1 to 3 are taken up for
discussion together in order to avoid the repetition of facts
and evidence.

10. Plaintiffs 1 to 3 have filed this suit for partition and
separate possession against defendants wherein defendant
No.1 to 3 are minors as on the date of filing the suit and as
such plaintiffs have filed this suit against defendant No.1 to 3
represented by their mother and natural guardian Smt.
Venilla wherein defendant No.1 to3 are represented by their
mother as minor guardian in this suit and it is the case of the
plaintiff that first plaintiff is legally wedded wife of deceased
K.Chandra, who died on 24/10/2007 and plaintiffs 2 and 3
are the legitimate sons born out of wedlock between first
plaintiff and deceased K. Chandra and plaintiffs have claimed
their alleged partition rights in respect of suit schedule
property alleging that there was partition deed held between
defendants and other sharers on 8/2/2002 and as such
plaintiffs claiming to be legitimate legal heirs of deceased

12 OS. No.7080 of 2009

K.Chandra. After demise of K. Chandra, plaintiffs
approached the defendant's mother and sought for partition
in the suit schedule property by effecting division. But,
defendants' minor guardian ie., mother refused to effect
partition in the suit schedule property and hence, plaintiffs
have filed this suit for partition and separate possession in
respect of suit schedule property, which is house property
bearing No. 14/3 I cross, Muneshwara Block, P.G.halli,
Bengaluru within the jurisdiction of Bruhat Bengaluru
Mahanagara Palike , Malleshwaram Zone measuring east to
west:12.6", north to south:40" totally measuring 500 sq, ft.,
bounded on East: private property, West by: Subramani & his
children property, North by Road and South by property
No.55. Defendants' minor guardian contested the suit by
filing written statement denied the claim of plaintiffs and also
denied the status of first plaintiff as she is the legally wedded
wife of deceased K.Chandra and also denied the status of
plaintiff No.2 and 3 born to late K. Chandra and first plaintiff
out of wedlock and on the contrary, defendant's guardian
mother contended that plaintiffs are strangers who are
excluded from consideration in the registered partition held
on 8/2/2002 between her mother-in-law Smt. Savithramma
and deceased K.Chandra and sons of deceased brother M.
Subramani in partition of joint family properties and
defendant's minor guardian also contended that she is legally

13 OS. No.7080 of 2009

wedded wife of K.Chandra as she married to deceased as per
Hindu customs and usage on 19/6/1994 wherein deceased
K. Chandra is related to her as maternal uncle, brother of her
mother and defendant No.1 to 3 are legitimate children born
to her out of wedlock between herself and late K.Chandra and
after demise of her husband, she filed application for
mutation of names of defendant s and accordingly, Bruhat
Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike changed the katha in the
name of defendant No.1 to 3 and minor guardian of
defendants contended that this suit for partition is not
maintainable and plaintiffs should have sought for
declaration for first plaintiff's status and she has to prove the
marital relation with late K. Chandra and plaintiffs are out of
possession and as such the partition suit is not maintainable
and also suit relief is barred by limitation. Hence, with this
defence, minor guardian of defendants Smt. Venilla has filed
written statement and contested the suit.

11. In order to prove plaintiff's case pleaded by them,
wherein first plaintiff has deposed in this case through
affidavit evidence filed in lieu of examination-in-chief wherein
P.W.1 has deposed by reiterating the facts as stated in the
pleadings and she claims to be the wife of deceased K.
Chandra and plaintiffs No.2 and 3 are born to her out of
wedlock, between herself and K. Chandra and she deposed

14 OS. No.7080 of 2009

that K. Chandra died on 24/10/2007 and defendants 1 to 3
are legitimate children of deceased K. Chandra and their
rights are protected under
section 16
of Hindu Marriage Act
and P.W.1 stated that she do not want to deprive the
legitimate share of defendants to the extent of half share and
P.W.1 stated that, defendants were allotted 'B' schedule
property in the partition deed to her share and suit schedule
property measuring 12.6 feetX 40 feet bearing Sy.No.14/3,
P.G.halli, Bengaluru and P.W.1 stated that plaintiffs are not
parties to the said partition deed dated: 8/2/2002. Hence,
P.W.1 has prayed for grant of legitimate share in the suit
schedule property and in the evidence of P.W.1, Ex.P.1 to 7
are came to be marked. The said documents are as under:

Ex.P.1 Birth certificate of 2nd son of plaintiff
No.1
Ex.P.2: Birth certificate of 1st son of plaintiff
No.1
Ex.P.3: Transfer certificate of 1st son of
plaintiff No.1.

Ex.P.4 Election I.D of plaintiff No.1
Ex.p.5: Certified copy of partition deed
executed on 8.2.2002
Ex.P.6: Certified copy of endorsement issued
by office of Police Commissioner,
Bengaluru to plaintiff No.1
Ex.P.7: Copy of complaint given by late
K.Chandra, husband of 1st plaintiff

15 OS. No.7080 of 2009

12. Counsel for defendant cross-examined to P.W.1,
wherein she admits that she knew defendants since about 10
years ago and P.W.1 stated that now she is residing behind
police station of Vyalikaval at Muniveerappa Block since
about 5 years ago and prior to that she was residing at
Sadashivanagar 12th cross as she was maid servant working
in the house of a Lawyer by name Chandrashekar since her
childhood and she stated that she was born in Bhadravathi
and she came over to Bengaluru during her age of 10 years.

She further stated that, her marriage with one K.Chandra
was performed in a temple, but, she do not remember how
many years have lapsed of her marriage and P.W.1 stated
that after she married to K.Chandra, they were residing at
Guttahalli, Muneshwara Block and P.W.1 stated that her
mother-in-law by name Savithramma and father-in-law
Kuppuswamy and P.W.1 state that she was working in an
house situated near Geethanjali Theatre, at that place
K.Chandra was working and during that period, both came to
know each other and she was working in First cross near
Geethanjali theatre as maid servant, but, she do not
remember the name of that house owner and she further
stated that said house is not in existence and P.W.1 stated
that she loved with K.Chandra and married to him and this
fact was known to parents of K. Chandra and P.W.1 stated

16 OS. No.7080 of 2009

that, she married K.Chandra in Subramani temple situated in
the vicinity of Geethanjali Theatre and P.W.1 also stated that
there are about 10-15 members were present at the time of
marriage and she also stated that her parents were present at
the time of marriage and P.W.1 admits that she has not
produced any documents to prove her marriage with
K.Chandra. However, P.W.1 state that all the documents of
marriage are with late K.Chandra and P.W.1 admits that
parents of K. Chandra had came to Bengaluru from Vellur for
the purpose of work and she admits that Kuppaswamy was
having three daughters and two sons and she has given name
of daughter of Kuppuswamy by name Shakunthala, but, she
do not know the name of other daughter as she did not come
to her house and one daughter of Kuppuswamy died after she
gave birth to a child and she do her name and she has given
name of brother of K. Chandra as Subramani, who was elder
son of Kuppuswamy and he expired now. The plaintiff has
got two female and three male issues and also she has got
sons and elder son by name Ravi, 2nd son is Ramesh and 3rd
son is Jaya and daughters are Latha and Geetha. P.W.1
admits that defendants' minor guardian Smt. Venilla is
daughter of her husband's sister and she admits that
marriage of Venilla with K.Chandra was held on 19/6/1994.
But, P.W.1 denied the place of their marriage. P.W.1 stated
that the defendants have not informed where marriage of

17 OS. No.7080 of 2009

Vebilla was performed. P.W.1 state that she came to know
about marriage of Venilla with K. Chandra after Smt. Venilla
begotten two children and P.W.1 stated that after her
marriage, they were residing near Geethanjali theatre at
Malleshwaram and thereafter they shifted their residence to
Sadashivanagar and P.W.1 stated that, they stayed for 3-4
months at I cross opposite to Geethanjali theatre house and
that house has been demolished now and hence she could
not depose the number of house. But, she admits that she
has not produced any documents to show that they are
residing in that house and P.W.1 further admits that she is
residing in Sadashivanagar in a lawyer house for a period of
20 years and she has stated that she got voter I.D, ration card
and P.W.1 stated that, address in ration card and election
card are shown that of her husband's friend's residence and
P.W.1 further cross-examined by defendant's counsel in
respect of obtaining ration card and other public records,
wherein P.W.1 stated that she has obtained ration card as
she was working as maid servant in that area and ration card
form was also filled in the name of owner of that house and
P.W.1 stated that, she has produced school certificate,
election card and other documents and also birth certificates
of her children and she do not know the date of birth of her
children and she stated that when she begotten two children
when she was residing at Sadashivanagar and she gave birth

18 OS. No.7080 of 2009

to her children in the house and her husband got registered
the birth of her children as both sons were born in
K.C.General Hospital at Malleshwaram and P.W.1 stated that,
the records maintained in respect of her children are not
given by hospital authority and she do not know when her
husband died and she has given date of death of her husband
as on Wednesday and his cremation was done on Thursday
and P.W.1 admits that when she obtained Ex.P.1 and 2
K.Chandra was not alive and she denied that she never
married with K.Chandra and not lead any marital life with
him and P.W.1 admits that, brothers of K.Chandra are
residing at Vyalikaval,Guttahalli, Muneshwara Block and
further admits that she ahs not produced any documents to
show that, she was residing with family members of K.
Chandra as joint family members. P.W.1 stated that, she has
not produced any photographs in support of her stay in the
joint family and P.W.1 admits that her husband's brother
Subramani is no more and defendants minor guardian Smt.
Venilla is daughter of her husband's sister namely Vasantha
and she denied her knowledge that daughter of Vasantha
was given in marriage to K. Chandra on 19/6/1994 and she
denied that late K.Chandra and Venilla were staying together
from 19/6/1994 to 24/10/2007 and she denied the partition
effected in the house property in equal share situated at
Muneshwawra Block and she denied that she is not related to

19 OS. No.7080 of 2009

family of Kuppuswamy and hence, she do not know the
factum of registered partition deed held between
Savithramma and others. Xx P.W.1 stated that her mother-
in-law had partition deed and she do not know whether she
has obtained partition deed from Sub-Registrar office and she
being illiterate lady, she do not know the contents of alleged
partition deed and she do not have any knowledge about the
properties fallen in that partition deed and she denied that
she has obtained partition deed after demise of K. Chandra
from Sub-Registrar office and she denied that in the partition
defendant No.1 to 3 and along with K. Chadnra have given
property and she denied that after partition katha has been
changed in the names of defendants and P.W.1 admits that
brother of K. Chandra's name is Subramani and his children
are residing in half portion of house property and she admits
that, she ahs not filed any complaint against alleged second
wife Smt. Venilla and she denied that as she is not belong to
late K. Chandra, Savithramma and her husband and hence,
share of K.Chandra was transferred in the names of his
children by registered partition deed and she admits that
she has not filed any objections before BBMP authority in
questioning the mutation of name of defendants and she
denied that there is no relationship with late Chandra. But,
P.W.1 stated that late K.Chnadra was her husband prior to he
married Smt. Venilla and P.W.1 got marked the endorsement

20 OS. No.7080 of 2009

issued by police Commissioner's office and also statement
given by K.Chandra before police station as per Ex.P.6 and 7
and though counsel for defendant examined P.W.1 on these
documents Ex.P.6a division 7, but, there is no material
admission given by P.W.1 in her further cross-examination.
On the contrary, P.W.1 denied the suggestion that Ex.P.6 and
7 are created documents produced and relied by her in the
suit and she also denied that there are no originals of Ex.P.6
and 7 in the concerned police station.

13. Defendants minor guardian his mother Smt. Venilla
has given her evidence by filing affidavit evidence under
Order
18 Rule 4 of C.P.C
wherein she has deposed that she married
to K.Chandra on 19/6/1994 at Sri. Valle Malai Vellore
Anbargal Chouldri at Vellore as per Hindu rights and custom
and out of their wedlock, she begotten 3 issues, they are
defendant No.1 to 3 and D.W.1 has given evidence in this
affidavit evidence as per contentions raised in her written
statement and chief examination of D.W.1 is the replica of
written statement filed by her and P.W.1 stated that there
was partition deed dated: 8/2/2002 wherein western half
portion measuring 12.6 feet east to west and north to south
40 feet allotted to children of deceased Subramani and
remaining eastern half partition was allotted to k.Chandra
along with defendant No.1 to 3 in the said partition dated:

21 OS. No.7080 of 2009

8/2/2002 and P.W.1 stated that her husband died on
24/10/2007 and she got entered the names of defendant
No.1 to 3 in the Corporation records and she is paying taxes
to the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike and hence,
D.W.1 stated that she married to K.Chandra as he is the
sister's daughter of K. Chandra and hence, D.W.1 denied that
claim of plaintiff that first plaintiff is the wife and plaintiff
No.2 and 3 are children of K. Chandra through first plaintiff.
D.W.1 got marked Ex.D.1 to 22, which are as under:

Ex.D.1 Family Genealogy issued by the
Revenue Inspector dated 7.2.2009
Ex.D.2: Wedding card dated 19.6.1994
Ex.D.3: Certified copy of partition deed dated
8.2.2002
Ex.D.4: Original receipt was having paid tax
dated 16.3.2009
Ex.D.5: Uttara Patra dated 16.3.2009
Ex.D.6 & D.7: Original katha certificate and katha
extract
Ex.D.8 Property original tax receipt dated
17.1.2004
Ex.D.9 to 13: Five tax paid receipts having paid
tax to BBMP
Ex.D.14 Encumbrance certificate dated
7.2.2009
Ex.D.15: Nil encumbrance certificate
Ex.D.16: Original voter ID of late
K.Chandrashekar
Ex.D.17 Original voter ID of D.W.1

22 OS. No.7080 of 2009

Ex.D.18: Original birth certificate of defendant
No.3 issued by the Medical officer of
Health
Ex.D.19: Birth certificate in respect of
defendant No.2
Ex.D.20 Birth certificate in respect of
defendant No.1

Ex.D.21 and 22: Certified copies of two tax paid
receipts

And he prays to dismiss the suit.

14. Learned counsel for plaintiff cross-examined D.W.1
at length wherein she stated that, she was born and brought
up in Madras and hence, she has studied 6th standard in
Tamil Medium of instructions and after her marriage she
moved to Bengaluru and D.W.1 stated that she got marked
Chandra on 19/6/1994 and her marriage was performed at
Katpadi, Vallimalai Temple and after her marriage, she stayed
for one week in her parental house and she came to her
matrimonial house and residing with late K.Chandra and she
stated that her husband was running garage situated at
Nataraj Talkies at Bengaluru and she do not know the name
of the area where the marriage was run and she came to
know that late K.Chandra was running garage after she
married to him and she admits that her husband K.Chandra
had expired and her father-in-law expired on 15/8/1981 and
she do not know her age when she lost her father-in-law and

23 OS. No.7080 of 2009

D.W.1 stated that, she has not witnessed her grand-father
and also her mother-in-law Smt. Savithramma who is no
more and D.W.1 stated Savithramma died about one year ago
and she was residing with them, wherein she stated that her
mother-in-law Savithramma had four children, out of them
two sons and two daughters and eldest son Subramani died
on 1/4/2001 and she do not know the age of two sons of late
Subramani and wife of late Subramani also died about two
years back and D.W.1 state that sons of Subramani are
married and one of the sons of Subramani had got love
marriage. D.W.1 denied that Ex.D.1 is incomplete family
genealogy and it is prepared as per her instructions. The said
G-Tree is as under:

KUPPUSWAMY GOUNDAR
|
M.Kuppuswamy @ Kuppaswamy Gounder
|
Wife Savithramma(died in the year 2014)
| | | |
M. Subramani K. Chandra Vasantha Shanthi
(son died on died on daughter daughter
2/04/2001 24/10/07 (married) (married)
3 sons plaintiffs 1-3
S.Ravi 1)Neela
S.Ramesh two sons
S.Jai Ganesh 1) Murugesh

2) Vinayaka
|
Defendants 1 to3and Smt.Venilla
(children of K. Chandra)

1. C. Gayathri (2) C.Bhavani and (3)Chi. Seena

24 OS. No.7080 of 2009

15. D.W.1 admits that, late K. Chandra was also called
as K.Chandrashekar and she admits that in Ex.D.3, K.
Chandra had signed as K.Chandra and she do not know the
contents of Ex.D.1 and caste of K. Chandra, he belongs to
Gowda Community. But, D.W.1 voluntarily stated that, she
belongs to SC caste and D.W.1 also stated that, she has
declared the caste of defendant No.1 to 3 before school
authorities as they belongs to SC caste and D.W.1 in her own
language stated that caste of defendants as "nakimaru" caste
and she denied her knowledge regarding the contents of
Ex.P.3 and she do not know whether school authorities had
made note of the caste of minor plaintiffs as Hindu Gounder
on the information given by late K. Chandra. D.W.1 denied
her knowledge regarding late K. Chandra married with first
plaintiff and she had already two sons/children out of
wedlock with K.Chandra and she do not know that deceased
K. Chandra already having children of about 9 years and she
do not know whether plaintiff had issued election identity
card in the year 2002 and in that card, husband of plaintiff is
shown as K. Chandra and she do not know about the alleged
notice issued by police department to late K.Chandra.

16. D.W.1 further cross-examined on 9/10/2015
wherein she admits after confrontation of Ex.D.3 wherein she
identified the signature of late K. Chandra and she confronted

25 OS. No.7080 of 2009

with Ex.P.7 and asked to identify the signature of K. Chandra
wherein at the first instance, she denied the signature of K.
Chandra on Ex.P.7, but, again at same stretch she admits the
signature of Ex.P.7 stating that, this signature of K. Chandra
is having resemblance to that of signature of K. Chandra and
she do not know whether her husband had already married
first plaintiff and he has got two sons through first plaintiff
and sons of her husband through his wife, who are plaintiff
No.2 and 3 in this suit and D.W.1 denied that caste of her
husband is different from her caste. Hence, there are no
possibility of K. Chandra marrying her and she denied that
there is no marital tie between herself and late K. Chandra
and she denied that Ex.D.2 produced by her his created
document for the purpose of this suit and D.W.1 further
denied that in order to avoid the legitimate share of plaintiffs,
she deposed false evidence before this court.

17. Counsel for the plaintiff submitted his arguments
contending that there is no specific denial by defendants that
guardian in respect of marriage plea in between deceased K.
Chandra and first plaintiff and D.W.1 denied her knowledge
regarding marital tie with first plaintiff and late K. Chandra
and counsel for plaintiff relied upon school records and
original birth certificates and T.C produced in respect of
plaintiff No.2 and 3 contending that birth certificates issued

26 OS. No.7080 of 2009

by competent authority under Birth and Death Act are
having legal presumption regarding entries contained in this
birth certificate as per
section 35
of Indian Evidence Act and
ed1 to ed4 are admissible documents and also Ex.P.7 which
is statement given by deceased K. Chandra before the
concerned police station on 15/4/2005 and in this statement,
deceased himself has admitted the status of first plaintiff and
that of Smt. Venilla and hence, Ex.P.7 is material document
to hold that first plaintiff is the first wife of deceased and
plaintiff No.2 and 3 are legitimate sons of late K.Chandra and
first plaintiff herein. Hence, counsel for plaintiff relied upon
Ex.P.1 to 7 praying for legitimate share of the plaintiffs 1 to 3
as the alleged partition deed Ex.P.5 is not binding upon the
plaintiffs and plaintiffs need not file a suit for declaration of
their status and possession relief, wherein suit for partition
is maintainable as plaintiffs are claiming their legitimate
share as they are legal heirs of deceased K. Chandra who died
on 24/10/2007.

18. Learned Counsel for defendants in his arguments
contended that suit is not maintainable for partition and
separate possession wherein plaintiffs shall have to file suit
for declaration of their status as per provisions of
Section 34

and
of Specific Relief Act and plaintiffs are not in exclusive
possession and they have also not specifically stated in

27 OS. No.7080 of 2009

respect of their dispossession from the suit schedule
property, hence, he relied upon Apex court decision reported
in AIR 1993 SCpage 957 in a case of Vinay Krishna Vrs
Keshav Chandra and another contending that suit for
partition is not maintainable and plaintiff No.1 in her
pleadings has not stated the specific date of her marriage with
late K.Chandra and hence, plaintiffs have failed to prove their
status as first wife of deceased K. Chandra by first plaintiff
and as such plaintiff No.2 and 3 are not legitimate sons born
to deceased K. Chandra and hence, plaintiffs are not entitled
for partition and separate possession.

19. On appreciation of oral and documentary evidence
placed on record, wherein plaintiff has filed this suit along
with her two sons claiming partition in the suit schedule
property claiming that she is the wife of deceased K. Chandra
and plaintiffs No.2 and 3 are her legitimate children born out
of wedlock between first plaintiff and late K. Chandra. On
perusal of plaintiff's documents, marked through P.W.1,
wherein Ex.P.1 and 2 are the original birth certificate issued
by competent authority, wherein in these two documents
name of deceased K. Chandra and Neela ie., first plaintiff is
mentioned wherein a male child was born on 31/7/1987 and
on 14/10/1989 and in Ex.P.3, T.C issued by the school
authorities in respect of second plaintiff, wherein father

28 OS. No.7080 of 2009

name is appearing as K. Chandra and as caste/religion
shown as Hindu Gounder and 2nd plaintiff obtained his T.C
after passing 5th standard and Ex.P.4 is Election Identity card
held by first plaintiff issued by Election Commission of India
wherein husband's name in this Ex.P.4 is shown as K.
Chandra and address of plaintiff No.1 shown as No. 526, 11th
A cross road, RMV extention, Jayamahal extension,
Bengaluru. Ex.P.5 is registered partition deed dated:

8/2/2002. After perusal of Ex.P.6, it is endorsement issued
by Commissioner of Police as per the complaint filed by
plaintiff No.1 and Ex.P.6 is issued on 24/12/2005 and Ex.P.7
is the statement of deceased K. Chandra, S/o Kuppaswamy
made before Vyalikaval Police station on 15/4/2005 wherein
deceased K. Chandra admits that he was residing in House
No.78, I cross, Vyalikaval, Bengaluru along with his second
wife and children and first wife had filed complaint against
him and he has understood the ingredients of complaint, but,
deceased K. Chandra denied the allegation of harassment on
her and it is stated in this statement that his wife, first
plaintiff was residing separately since many years and she
was having two children and though he called for leading
marital life to first plaintiff, but, she refused and residing
separately and deceased had made reference of partition
effected between himself and his brother and now he is
staying along with his second wife and defendants and

29 OS. No.7080 of 2009

interest he statement it is stated that he did not change the
katha of the suit schedule property either in the name of first
wife or second wife and he had no necessity to change the
katha in the name of his first wife or second wife and he had
intention of effecting equal division when time comes and
further it is recited that he is ready to receive first plaintiff if
she is ready to lead marital life with him and he will make
arrangements for residence and for which his brother's sons
namely Ravi and Ramesh have not objected and as such with
this submission, deceased K. Chandra has given statement
on 15/4/2005 before the concerned police station and
assured that hence-forth, he will look after his wife and see
that she could not face any inconvenience.

20. Counsel for plaintiff during cross-examination of
D.W.1, confronted the admitted signature of K. Chandra on
Ex.D.3 ie., partition deed dated: 8/2/2002 wherein D.W.1
admitted the signature of K. Chandra on Ex.D.3 and further
Ex.P.7 was confronted to D.W.1 for identification of signature
of late K. Chandra wherein initially she denied to identify the
signature on Ex.P.7 but, at the same breath, D.W.1 state that
signature on Ex.P.7 of late K. Chandra is resembling as
compared to Ex.D.3 signature and though plaintiffs have not
produced any specific documents in respect of marriage
proof, but, P.W.1 stated that all the documents of her

30 OS. No.7080 of 2009

marriage with late K. Chandra are in the custody of deceased
and P.W.1 stated that their marriage was performed in
Subramani temple in the vicinity of Malleshwaram and
considering the recitals of Ex.P.7 and though plaintiffs have
not obtained any expert opinion under
section 45
of Evidence
Act by sending Ex.P.7 and Ex.D.3. But, this court has to
resort
Section 73
of Indian Evidence Act by comparison of
disputed and admitted signatures of deceased K. Chandra by
comparison of Ex.P.7 and Ex.D.3 wherein it appears that
from the text of Ex.P.7, it can be inferred that relation
between K. Chandra and first plaintiff are strained and first
plaintiff was residing in separately deserting the company of
K. Chandra and it appears that there were no cordial
relationship between deceased K. Chandra and first plaintiff
after plaintiff No.2 and 3 were born to them and it appears
that K. Chandra had married Smt. Venilla, who is his sister's
daughter, daughter of Vasantha on 19/6/1994 and
considering Ex.P.2 and 3 wherein plaintiff No.2 and 3 were
born in the year 1987 and 1989 and as such considering the
evidence of P.W.1, wherein she ahs approached this court of
law stating that she was married to deceased K. Chandra and
plaintiff No.2 and 3 are born to her out of wedlock. Though
plaintiff has not produced any documentary evidence in proof
of marriage and admittedly, P.W.1 is illiterate lady and in her
evidence stated that she was working as maid servant when

31 OS. No.7080 of 2009

she came over to Bengaluru in the house of Chandrashekar, a
Lawyer by profession in Sadashivanagar and deceased K.
Chandra was also working in Garage and P.W.1 stated that
she was working as mad servant in the house situated at
Geethanjali Theatre and in that place itself, deceased K.
Chandra was working and they loved each other and
deceased married her and hence, Ex.P.7 which is vital
document and material piece of evidence to establish the
relationship of first plaintiff and that of deceased K. Chandra
and plaintiff had discharged her burden by producing Ex.P.7
wherein it is statement made by deceased K. Chandra during
his life time and whereas onus of disproving Ex.P.7 shifts on
D.W.1, wherein D.W.1 accept her oral evidence, but, she has
not lead any evidence of her family member in order to rebut
the document Ex.P.7. On the contrary, D.W.1 failed to
examine her mother Smt. Vasantha who is material witness
and best witness to speak the marital relationship of first
plaintiff with deceased brother K. Chandra. However,
documents produced by D.W.1 shows that late K. Chandra
married to D.W.1 on 19/6/1994 as per Ex.D.2 and it is a fact
that as per Ex.D.3 there was partition in respect of suit
schedule property between Smt. Savithramma, wife of
Kuppuswamy and her sons wherein elder son namely M.
Subramani died on 2/4/2001 leaving behind his three sons
who are parties in this partition deed and late K.Chandra

32 OS. No.7080 of 2009

and defendant No.1 to 3 are parties to this partition. Wherein
plaintiffs are not parties to Ex.D.3 partition deed dated:

8/2/2002. Hence, plaintiffs have filed this suit for partition
and separate possession wherein as per decision reported in
2008(4) KCCR 2333 Division Bench of Hon'ble High Court of
Karnataka in a case of M.Prithviraj and others Vs. Smt.
Leelamma.N and others, wherein Head note 'A' of this
decision ratio laid down wherein long spell of living together
men and woman presumption of marriage, it is rebuttable
presumption and burden casted on defendant to rebut the
presumption and this ratio held that relationship can be
inferred looking marital status and also children born are
legitimate children and in this case also first plaintiff stated
that late K. Chandra married to her and she was residing
along with K. Chandra and lead matrimonial life and as per
Ex.P.2 and Ex.P.3 plaintiff No.2 and 3 were born and Ex.P.7
is material piece of evidence wherein deceased himself had
admitted the status of plaintiffs during his life time and
hence considering the recitals of Ex.P.7 and considering the
date of birth of defendant No.1 to 3 wherein defendant No.1 to
3 were born in the year 1996, 1999 and 2004. Considering
the birth extracts of defendant No.1 to 3 wherein deceased
who married D.W.1 subsequently in the year 1994 and
thereafter defendant No.1 to 3 were born in between deceased
K. Chandra and D.W.1. Hence, relying upon Ex.P.7 and

33 OS. No.7080 of 2009

coupled with other documents wherein the case of the
plaintiff pleaded herein appears to be probable and first
plaintiff proved to be the first wife of late K. Chandra and
plaintiff No.2 and 3 are legitimate children of late K. Chandra
and as per Ex.P.7, D.W.1 appears to be second wife and
defendant No.1 to 3 are children born to K. Chandra through
D.W.1 and as such
Section 16
of Hindu Marriage Act apples
to defendant No.1 to 3 wherein it appears that late K.
Chandra had married D.W.1 during subsistence of marriage
with first plaintiff. However, plaintiffs have admitted that
defendant No.1 to 3 are having half share in the suit schedule
property and hence, contention of defendants that suit for
partition is not maintainable is not acceptable contention and
citation relied by them is not squarely applicable to the facts
of this case and on the contrary, plaintiffs have challenged
Ex.D.3, partition deed by filing this partition suit and it is
settled proposition of law that one partition relief is claimed
in joint family property wherein plaintiffs need not be claimed
declaration in respect of registered documents for which
they are not the parties as executants and one holds that
plaintiffs are entitled to partition, then in that circumstances,
it is to be presumed that any registered documents came into
effect in the absence of plaintiffs wherein such document is
not binding upon plaintiffs' share and in this case also,
plaintiffs are not parties to Ex.D.3 and hence, Ex.D.3 does

34 OS. No.7080 of 2009

not take away the rights of plaintiffs in the suit schedule
property. Hence, plaintiffs are entitle for legitimate share in
the suit schedule property claimed by them and as such I
hold that plaintiffs have proved that they are entitled for
half share and accordingly, Issue No.1 and 2 are answered in
affirmative and Issue No.3 is answered in negative.

21. Defendants have contended in their written
statement that suit filed by the plaintiff is barred by
limitation. But, this contention taken by defendants is not
substantiated by any cogent evidence and as such this
remained as defence in the written statement. This suit
brought by plaintiff for the relief of partition and possession
on the cause of action as averred in the plaint and it is
specific case of the plaintiffs that they came to know about
Ex.D.3 and K.Chandra died on 24/10/2007 wherein this suit
brought by plaintiffs within two years of date of death of K.
Chandra and plaintiffs have proved that they are first wife
and children of K. Chandra and he was also called by
K.Chandrashekara and hence, this suit brought by the
plaintiffs as per Article110 of Limitation Act is well within
prescribed time in respect of partition relief and hence,
defendants have failed to prove their contention raised in
respect of plea of limitation. Accordingly, issue No.4 is
answered in negative.

35 OS. No.7080 of 2009

21. ISSUE NO.5:-This issue is framed in respect of
relief of partition prayed by the plaintiffs. Wherein plaintiffs
have sought for awarding half share and considering the facts
and circumstances of this case, plaintiff No.2 and 3 are
legitimate children of K. Chandra and whereas defendant
No.1 to 3 are though illegitimate children, but,
section 16
© of

Hindu Marriage Act
applies to defendant No.1 to 3 and in
view of recent legal proposition, wherein illegitimate children
are also entitled to get equal share in their father's property
and as such plaintiffs and defendants are entitled for 1/6th
share in the suit schedule property and hence, plaintiffs have
proved that, they are entitled to get legitimate share in the
suit schedule property, which is the property belongs to
deceased K. Chandra obtained in registered partition deed
dated: 8/2/2002 and hence, plaintiffs are entitled for share
as claimed in this suit and as such this suit filed by the
plaintiffs deserves to be decreed with costs against
defendants. Accordingly, Issue No.5 is answered in
affirmative.

22. Issue No.6: In view of my findings arrived and
discussed and reasons given on Issue No.1 to 5, the suit filed
by the plaintiff deserves to be decreed against defendants 1 to

3. Hence, I proceed to pass the following:-

36 OS. No.7080 of 2009

ORDER
Suit filed by the plaintiffs for the relief of partition and
separate possession is hereby decreed with costs.

Plaintiffs together are entitled for half share in the
suit schedule property and the share of plaintiffs can be
divided by appointing Court Commissioner as per amended
section 54 of C.P.C.

Draw preliminary decree accordingly.

{Dictated to the Judgment writer , transcribed by her,
corrected and then pronounced by me in open court this 29th
day of February 2016.}

(S.V.KULKARNI)
XI ADDL.CITY CIVIL JUDGE
BANGALORE CITY.

ANNEXUERE

List of witnesses examined for plaintiff:-

P.W.1 Smt. Neela

37 OS. No.7080 of 2009

List of documents exhibited for plaintiff:-

Ex.P.1 Birth certificate of 2nd son of plaintiff
No.1
Ex.P.2: Birth certificate of 1st son of plaintiff
No.1
Ex.P.3: Transfer certificate of 1st son of
plaintiff No.1.

Ex.P.4 Election I.D of plaintiff No.1
Ex.p.5: Certified copy of partition deed
executed on 8.2.2002
Ex.P.6: Certified copy of endorsement issued
by office of Police Commissioner,
Bengaluru to plaintiff No.1
Ex.P.7: Copy of complaint given by late
K.Chandra, husband of 1st plaintiff

List of witnesses examined for defendant:

DW.1 Smt. Vennila

List of documents exhibited for Defendant:-

Ex.D.1 Family Genealogy issued by the
Revenue Inspector dated 7.2.2009
Ex.D.2: Wedding card dated 19.6.1994
Ex.D.3: Certified copy of partition deed dated
8.2.2002
Ex.D.4: Original receipt was having paid tax
dated 16.3.2009
Ex.D.5: Uttara Patra dated 16.3.2009
Ex.D.6 & D.7: Original katha certificate and katha
extract

38 OS. No.7080 of 2009

Ex.D.8 Property original tax receipt dated
17.1.2004
Ex.D.9 to 13: Five tax paid receipts having paid
tax to BBMP
Ex.D.14 Encumbrance certificate dated
7.2.2009
Ex.D.15: Nil encumbrance certificate
Ex.D.16: Original voter ID of late
K.Chandrashekar
Ex.D.17 Original voter ID of D.W.1
Ex.D.18: Original birth certificate of defendant
No.3 issued by the Medical officer of
Health
Ex.D.19: Birth certificate in respect of
defendant No.2
Ex.D.20 Birth certificate in respect of
defendant No.1

Ex.D.21 and 22: Certified copies of two tax paid
receipts

XI ADDL.CITY CIVIL JUDGE,
BANGALORE CITY

39 OS. No.7080 of 2009

40 OS. No.7080 of 2009