Bangalore District Court

State Of Karnataka vs Sri. B.M. Chandrashekar on 23 February, 2021
SC No. 1108/2013

*IN THE COURT OF LXIX ADDITIONAL CITY CIVIL AND
SESSIONS JUDGE, BENGALURU CITY (CCH-70)

Present: Sri. Gururaj Somakkalavar, M.A, LLB.,
LXIX Additional City Civil and
Sessions Judge, Bengaluru.

Dated this the 23rd day of February, 2021

SESSIONS CASE No.1108/2013

Complainant : State of Karnataka
By Girinagar Police Station

(By Learned Public Prosecutor )

-V/S-

accused : 1. Sri. B.M. Chandrashekar
@ Chandru,
S/o Late Manjunath,
Aged about 56 years,
R/at No.1113/N, 1st H Main,
behind Nanda Gokul Kalyan
Mantapa, Girinagar 2nd phase,
Bengaluru - 560 085.

2 Sri. Prabhakar C.K.
S/o Late C. Krishnamurthy,
Aged about 52 years,
R/at No.109, 6th Cross,
3rd Block, Tyagarajnagar,
Bengaluru - 560 028.

(By Sri.K.Venkataramana, Advocate)

1. Date of commission of offence; 17/18.04.2013
2 Date of report of occurrence; 18.04.2013
3 Date of commencement of 22.07.2014
evidence;
SC No. 1108/2013

4 Date of closing of evidence; 16.11.2016
5 Name of the complainant ; Smt. Geetha Acharya
6 Offence complained of ; Sec. 302, 109,
120B R/W 34 of

IPC
.
7 Opinion of the Judge; accused No.1
found guilty for the
offence u/sec. 302

IPC
and not guilty
for the offence
u/sec. 109, 120(B)
r/w 34 of
IPC
.

A2 found not guilty
for the offence
u/sec. 302, 109,
120(B) r/w 34 of

IPC

: JUDGMENT :

This Charge Sheet is filed by the PI of Girinagar Police
against the accused for the offence punishable U/Sec. 302,109,
120B R/W 34 of
Indian Penal Code
.

2. The case of the prosecution in brief is as follows:-

Preethy Acharya is the wife of the accused No.1 by name
Chandrashekar and there was dispute between them, hence she
lodged complaint against her husband Chandrashekar alleging
that accused no.1 Chandrashekar is harassing her physically and
mentally and he is also not giving share in his property and hence
A1 was sent to jail for sometime and after release on the bail
under the vengeance of sending him to jail he has developed
enmity against Preethy Acharya and in this regard the accused
no.1 hatched plan to kill Preethy Acharya and her relative Veda
and conspired with A2 Prabhakar and on 17/18.04.2013 at about
SC No. 1108/2013

1.00 AM in the night A1 at his house under the influence of alcohol
assaulted his wife Preethy Acharya with rod on her head for about
6 to 7 times and when her cousin Veda intervened he assaulted
with same rod to her for about 6 to 7 times and killed them on the
spot itself. During the course of investigation the I.O arrested the
accused No.1 and 2 and after completion of the investigation the
IO filed the charge sheet against the accused.

3. The committal court after taking cognizance of the
charge-sheet registered C.C. No.10536/2013 and committed the
case for trial under
Sec. 209
of Code of Criminal Procedure, after
having complied with the provisions of
Sec. 207
and
of Code
of Criminal Procedure. In pursuant to the committal order, on
committal of the case, present case has been registered and
assigned to this Court for disposal in accordance with law. At the
time of committal, accused were in JC. He represented through his
advocate. My learned Predecessor after hearing the accused and
counsels on both side peruse and found sufficient materials for
presuming the commission of offence by the accused and hence
framed the charge against the accused for the offence punishable
U/Sec. 302,109, 120B R/W 34 of
Indian Penal Code
. Contents of
the charge were read over and explained to the accused No.1 and

2. The accused No.1 and 2 pleaded not guilty and claims to be
tried.

4. While submitting the Charge Sheet the IO has cited 42
witnesses, but examined only 30 witnesses as PW.1 to 30 and got
marked 62 documents exhibited as Ex.P1 and P.62 and also got
marked 15 Material Objects as MO.No.1 to MO.No.15. After
completion of prosecution side evidence, accused is examined
SC No. 1108/2013

u/sec. 313 of
Cr.P.C
. in order to explain the incriminating evidence
appeared against him and his answers are recorded in his own
words. The accused denied the entire incriminating evidence as
false, not aware and also that he has been falsely implicated in
this case. A1 submitted written submission

5. Heard the arguments of the learned P.P. and the counsel
for the accused. Peruse the oral and documentary evidence
available on records.

6. In the light of above materials and allegations of
prosecution, following points are arises for my consideration:-

1. Is the death of deceased Preethy Acharya
and Veda is a homicidal one?

2. Is the prosecution proves beyond all
reasonable doubt that on 17/18.04.2013 at
about 1.00 AM in the night A1 at his house
under the influence of alcohol assaulted his wife
Preethy Acharya with rod on her head for about
6 to 7 times and when her cousin Veda
intervened he assaulted with same rod to her
for about 6 to 7 times and killed them on the
spot itself, thereby the accused committed the
offence punishable u/sec. 302 of
IPC
?

3. Whether the prosecution proves that the
murder of deceased Preethi Acharya and Veda
is an act of conspiracy among accusedd no.1
and 2 punishable u/sec 109, 120(B) r/w 34 of

IPC
?

4. What order?

7. This court upon appreciation of available materials, with
SC No. 1108/2013

reference to prevailing legal aspects, give findings to the above
points as follows:-

Point No.1 : In affirmative
Point No.2 : In affirmative
Point No.3 : In negative
Point No.4 : As per final order, for the
following:-

: REASONS :

8. POINT NO.1:- According to the prosecution Preethy
Acharya is the wife of the accused No.1 by name Chandrashekar
and there was disputed between them, hence she lodged
complaint against her husband Chandrashekar alleging that
accused no.1 Chandrashekar is harassing her physically and
mentally and he is also not giving share in his property and hence
A1 was sent to jail for sometime and after release on the bail
under the vengeance of sending him to jail he has developed
enmity against Preethy Acharya and in this regard the accused
no.1 hatched plan to kill Preethy Acharya and her relative Veda
and conspired with A2 Prabhakar and on 17/18.04.2013 at about
1.00 AM in the night A1 at his house under the influence of alcohol
assaulted his wife Preethy Acharya with rod on her head for about
6 to 7 times and when her cousin Veda intervened he assaulted
with same rod to her for about 6 to 7 times and killed them on the
spot itself.

9. The prosecution in order to prove the death of both
Preethy Acharya and Veda has examined PW.26 the Doctor who
has conducted the PM examination on the dead bodies of Preethy
Acharya and Veda and also given report as per Ex.P.47 and 50.
SC No. 1108/2013

The said PW. 26 Dr. Naveen Kumar conducted PM examination on
dead bodies of Preethy Acharya and Veda on the request from the
police. It is depose by PW. 26 that said body of Preethy Acharya
was identified by ASI Umashankar. He conducted PM examination
on 18.4.2013 from 2.10 to 3.10 pm. He further depose that on
examinaiton of dead body he noticed Rigor mortis present all over
the body. Post mortem staining present over back of the body.
Dried blood stains present over the exposed parts of the body. He
has noted down the following external injuries:

1. Lacerated wound, measuring 6x0.5 cms x bone deep
present on the right parietal region of the scalp 7cms from
the top of the right ear. The margins of the wound are
irregular, ragged and the edges are undermined.

2. Lacerated wound, measuring 4x0.5 cm x bone deep present
on the right temporal region of the scalp 2 cm above fro the
top of the right ear. The margins of the wound are irregular,
ragged and the edges are undermined.

3. Lacerated wound, measuring 2.5x0.5 cms x bone deep
present behind the right ear. The margins of the wound are
irregular, ragged and the edges are blunt.

4. Lacerated wound, measuring 2x0.5 cms x subcutaneous
tissue deep present on the right ear lobule. The margins of
the would are irregular, ragged and the edges are blunt.

5. Lacerated wound, measuring 4x0.5 cms x bone deep
present over the right forehead, 3 cms above from the right
eyebrow. The margins of the wound are irregular, ragged
and the edges are undermined.
SC No. 1108/2013

6. Lacerated wound, measuring 1x0.5 cm x bone deep present
on the lateral aspect of right eye. The margins of the wound
are irregular, ragged and the edges are undermined.

7. Lacerated wound, measuring 3.5x0.5 cm x bone deep
present on the left side of forehead, 1 cm above left eye.
The margins of the wound are irregular, ragged and the
edges are undermined.

On Internal Examination he notice following injuries: Scalp:

contuse over right temporo-parietal regions measuring 14x4cms.
Right temporal is muscle contuse.

Skull: Linear fracture present in the middle cranial fossa
passing through and through dividing the base of the skull into 2
halves, measuring 16 cms.

Meninges: Torn at fractured sites
Brain & Spinal Cord: Brain- covered by subdural and subarachnoid
haemorrhage present all over the cerebral hemisphere.

Stomach & its contents: Stomach contains partially digested
rice meal. Smell- fruity odour and Mucosa Normal.

After conducting the entire PM examination he came to
conclusion that the death of Preethy Acharaya was due to shock
and hammerhage as a result of severe head injuries sustained. He
identified the PM report as per Ex.P.47. He has submitted report
and he opined that external injuries and internal injuries would be
cause by weapon examined leading to fatal head injuries cause to
death.

PW. 26 further depose that he conducted PM examination
on dead body of Veda and he has noticed external injures. Rigor
SC No. 1108/2013

mortis present all over the body. Post mortem staining present
over back of the body. Dried blood stains present over the exposed
parts of the body. He has noted down the following external
injuries:

Lacerated wound, measuring 3 x 0.5 cms x bone deep
present over the right parietal region of the scalp 10cms above
the right eyebrow. The margins of the wound are irregular, ragged
and the edges are undermined.

Lacerated wound, measuring 6x0.5 cm x bone deep present
over the right parietal region of the scalp 6 cm below the injury
No.1. The margins of the wound are irregular, ragged and the
edges are undermined.

Lacerated wound, measuring 6x0.5 cms x bone deep
present over the upper part the left parietal region of the scalp. 10
cm above the left eyebrow. The margins of the wound are
irregular, ragged and the edges are undermined.

Lacerated wound, measuring 9x0.5 cms x bone deep
present over the left parietal region of the scalp. 2cm below the
injury NO.3. The margins of the would are irregular, ragged and
the edges are Undermined.

Lacerated wound, measuring 4x0.5 cms x bone deep
present over the left parietal region of the scalp, 1 cms below the
injury NO.4. The margins of the wound are irregular, ragged and
the edges are undermined.

Contusion measuring 8x9 cm present over the middle part of
the back of the both sides of fore arm
Contusion measuring 4x4 cm present over the back of the
both hands.
SC No. 1108/2013

On Internal Examination he found On opening the scalp
contuse over right temporo parietal regions measuring 7 X 5 Cms.
Right temporalis muscle contuse contusion present over left
parietal region measuring 3 X 2 cms.

Skull vault-Sutural fracture present over right coronal region
measuring for 15cms and anterior part of saggital suture for 3cms.

Base of Skull Linear fracture extending from left temporal
bonde to left side of middle cranial fossa measuring 5cms. Linear
fracture extending from right temporal bone to right side of middle
cranial fossa measuring 7 cms.

Meninges : Torn at fractured sites.

Brain : Covered by subdural and subarachnoid haemorrhage
present all over the cerebral hemispheres.

Stomach & its contents: Stomach contains partially digested
rice meal. Smell- fruity odour and Mucosa Normal.

9. In order to substantiate injuries are cause on the dead
body of both ladies, the prosecution examined PW.27, the
Tahsildar who has conducted mahazar on the dead body of
Preethy Acharya. He has depose that he has received requisition
as per Ex.P.55 to conduct mahazar on the deceased and further
he recorded statements of Amith, Vikram. The said mahazar was
signed by PW. 22 and 23.

10. The defense mainly A1 cross examined all the
witnesses. During the cross-examination of PW. 26 Dr. Naveen
Kumar, it is tried to elicit that there is a procedural lapse on the
part of PW. 26 while conducting PM examination. It is also tried to
elicit that the mahazar was conducted 10 days earlier to the
SC No. 1108/2013

alleged murder pointing at the date mentioned in PM report i.e.

8.4.2013. However PW. 26 denied the said suggestions. Further it
is also suggested that the PM report was fabricated as per the
convenience of the IO in order to implicate the accused. The said
suggestion was denied by the witness.

11. Subsequently the advocate for A1 and A2 cross
examined PW. 26. However there is no much cross-examination
in respect of the injuries but cross-examination in the line of
weapon use in the said crime. Further defense also cross
examined PW. 27 and it is tried to elicit the lapse on the part of
PW. 27 with respect to conducting of mahazar Ex.P.27. There is no
much cross-examination in respect of the injuries cause on the
dead body of both deceased. Rest of the cross-examination is in
respect of the denial of the statements.

12. Even the defense also cross examined PW. 21 to 23.
On appreciation of the entire material on record PW. 26 Dr.
Naveen Kumar after conducting the entire PM examination on
dead bodies, he has opined and gave report to the effect that the
injuries found on dead body of Preethy Acharya and Veda were
ante mortem and he depose that there are lacerated wounds on
the head, ear, forehead of deceased and in respect of internal
injuries he depose that contuse over right temporo-parietal
regions measuring 14x4cms. Right temporalis muscle contuse.

Skull: Linear fracture present in the middle cranial fossa
passing through and through dividing the base of the skull into 2
halves, measuring 16 cms. Meninges: Torn at fractured sites, Brain
& Spinal Cord: Brain- covered by subdural and subarachnoid
haemorrhage present all over the cerebral hemisphere. The said
SC No. 1108/2013

evidence of PW. 26 is corroborated with the evidence of PW. 27
and the inquest mahazar Ex.P.41 an 42.

13. On appreciation of evidence coupled with the P.M report
and other documents such as Ex.P.41 and 42 and mahazar
Ex.P.55 it can be said the wounds are caused due to assault by
the weapon. It is clear from the cross-examination of this witness
by the defense that, the defense does not dispute the death as
homicidal. The answers elicited from the witnesses mainly PW. 26
and 27 do give clear picture that homicidal death has not been
disputed. All that which is tried to elicit from PW. 26 is with regard
to weapon use. The defense cross examined PW. 26 regarding the
weapon use in the commission of the crime. PW. 26 during his
examination in chief depose that he has received requisition letter
from P.I. to furnish opinion regarding weapon for commission of
offence. The said requisition is marked as Ex.P.52. He further
depose that he has received weapon an iron rod packed and
sealed. The said iron rod measures 37.5 cm in length 9 cm in
circumference, 2 cm in diameter weighing 1800 grams and reddish
brown colour stains present over the surface of the weapon at
places. He opined that the external injuries from 1 to 7 and
external and internal head injury could be cause by the type of
weapon examined, leading to fatal head injury causing death of
Preethy Acharya. He opined regarding PM report No. 178/2013 dt.
18.04.2013

14. He further depose that regarding PM report No.
179/2013 dt. 18.04.2013 he opined that the external injuries from
1 to 7 and external and internal head injury could be cause by the
SC No. 1108/2013

type of weapon examined, leading to fatal head injury and causing
death of Veda.

15. accused No.1 cross examined the witness and in the
cross-examination he tried to elicit that the weapon which was
examined by PW. 26 is not a weapon use for commission of
offence. The line of cross-examination is that the measurement in
centimeters and diameters is contrary to each other. The said
suggestion was denied by PW. 26. It is further suggested that
circumference of an object is always triple times of its diameter
and as per the universal principal the circumference is always 3.1
time of diameter, which is pi value. He denied that instead of
mentioning 6cm of circumference he has mentioned 9cm. He also
denied the suggestion that he has not received the iron rod and
he has not examined. That he has given false report and he has
not examined the rod M.O.15. He has not measured the
dimensions of the rod vide length, circumference, diameter and
weight and he has not mentioned the kind of the surface of the
rod in his report, so also the nature of edges of the rod. He has
denied all suggestions.

16. He further denied the suggestions that the injuries
sustained by both the deceased are not cause by the MO 15
andthe injuries mentioned in the PM report are caused only when
assault is made with a long, thin rod or object with sufficient force
and the external injury No.1 as mentioned in Ex.P.47 and external
injury No.4 as mentioned in Ex.P.50 are only cause by using sharp
edged object and he also denied the suggestion that whenever
assault is made through a blunt object parallel Linier contusions
SC No. 1108/2013

are cause and the skin is smashed and cross ruptured when hit
by blunt object with heavy force. He further denied the suggestion
that he has not examined the genitical organs of both the
deceased. He has admitted that before conducting PM
examination he has prepared the notes on findings on the dead
body but he has not produce the same before the court. He further
denied the suggestion that PM examination is not done in
accordance with protocol and opinion given as per the request of
the police in order to support their case and he has given false
evidence.

17. On perusal of the cross-examination of this witness by
A1 as well as his counsel they do not dispute regarding death of
both deceased, but they dispute regarding use of weapon in the
commission of crime. Further PW. 26 in his report specifically
stated that the injuries mentioned in PM report found on the dead
body of both deceased could be caused by MO. 15 iron rod. The
said report is supported with evidence of PW. 26. It is also
necessary to mention that on perusal of Ex.P.3 to P.10 the photos,
the bodies were found in the pool of blood and it reveals that there
is a grave assault on both deceased and bodies were lying on the
floor from long time. On seeing the photos it is clear that
deceased were brutally assaulted on the head with weapon. The
said aspect can be ascertained from the photos Ex.P.3 to 10 the
blood stains on the walls. The defense also not put up any theory
regarding injuries caused on the bodies of deceased. Even in the
cross-examination of the witnesses, there is nothing elicited to
discard Ex.P.47, 50 and the opinion of PW. 26. The evidence of
PW. 26 coupled with the Ex.P.47 and 50 corroborate the ocular
SC No. 1108/2013

evidence of PW. 1 that there is assault on both deceased. As
stated above defense has not disputed the death of both
deceased. It is clear that injuries caused due to assault with MO.
15 , as a result there is death of Preethy Acharya and Veda. With
this it can be concluded that death of Preethy Acharya and Veda is
nothing but homicidal. Accordingly point No.1 is answered in
affirmative.

18. POINT NO.2; There are no eye witnesses to the
incident. The entire case rests on circumstantial evidence. The
main circumstances that can be pointed out are;

1. The existence of strain relationship between accused no.1
and deceased Preethy Acharya.

2. accused present on the day of incident.

3. Commission of offence.

4. Motive.

5. Recovery of incriminating articles on discloser made by
accused.

I] ARGUMENTS OF PROSECUTION ;

19. Learned P.P has summed up case that the prosecution
has been able to establish all circumstances beyond reasonable
doubt to hold accused conspired together and they were
successful in achieving their goal. Some of the witnesses
examined by the prosecution have not completely supported the
case of the prosecution, but their part of hostality does not in any
way affect evidence given by other material witnesses. It is
SC No. 1108/2013

argued that if the entire material evidence is considered it shows
that they are not the interested witnesses in the sense that these
witnesses have not made any attempt to falsely implicate the
accused in the case and hence their evidence cannot be
discarded. Placing this principle before this court prosecution
addressed argument.

20. It is argued that the accusedd had three wives, two
marriages of A1 end up in divorce and the deceased Preethy
Acharya is the third wife of A1. From the conduct of A1 it is clear
that A1 was not of good character. accusedd No.1 married to
deceased Preethy Acharya on mutual agreeing between the family.
After the marriage A1 started to harass deceased. It is very much
clear from the evidence placed by the prosecution mainly Ex.P.12
and 13 wherein the said deceased Preethy Acharya lodged
complaint of domestic violence and harassment even the criminal
intimidation. The said fact is also proved by the prosecution
through evidence that accusedd No.1 use to harass physically
and mentally. PW. 1 and 3 to 6 have depose regarding dispute
between deceased Preethy Acharya and accusedd No.1. It is
further argued that said deceased Veda is the relative of Preethy
Acharya. Before the fatal day the said Preethy Acharya alongwith
family visited Mangalore and she is about to come to Bombay
alongwith her parents. But her two children went to Bombay
alongwith grant parents whereas Preethy Acharya and Veda
came to Bangalore to complete some of the works to collect T.C.
The said incident day and the days before the death of deceased
Preethy Acharya was specifically established by the prosecution.

21. It is not in dispute that, on the said day deceased
SC No. 1108/2013

Preethy Acharya and Veda came to Bangalore and they were
present in the house of A1. PW. 1 has specifically narrated that
accused No.1 was harassing Preethy Acharya and she in the night
at about 10.30 informed the same through phone call to PW. 1
and PW. 1 cautioned Preethy Acharya to keep herself safe in the
room. PW. 1 also narrated the incident happened on the morning
wherein when she came down to Bangalore and visited the house
of accused No.1 and she found that Preethy Acharya and Veda
were dead and they were murdered. The said accused No.1 was
not present on the said day. Subsequently she lodged the
complaint before concerned police and the police have
investigated the matter. She has specifically depose regarding
harassment of accused No.1. It is further argued by the
prosecution that PW. 2 in his evidence stated regarding recovery
of rod at the instance of accused No.1. Hence the recovery of
incriminating article rod is proved by the prosecution.

22. It is further argued that PW. 2 has supported the case of
the prosecution, though he is cross examined by accused No.1,
but nothing material is elicited from his cross-examination. Further
it is argued that the witnesses PW. 3 has supported the case of
the prosecution and he is the witness who has last seen the
accused and he has depose that there was a quarrel between
deceased Preethy Acharya and accused No.1. This witness has
specifically depose regarding incident wherein he heard the
screaming of woman and child in the mid night of the incident day.
The testimony of this witness cannot be discarded as there is no
enmity between accused No.1 and the witness. He has depose
naturally the incident occurred during that day. Further PW. 4 also
SC No. 1108/2013

supported the case regarding harassment by accused No.1 to
Preethy Acharya. To both witnesses there is no suggestion
regarding incident. It is further argued that the stand of accused
No.1 during cross-examination is not correct and proper that
husband of Preethy Acharya use to quarrel with Preethy Acharya
and the stand regarding someone use to visit the house of
accused No.1 when accused No.1 was not in the home. This
defense is not correct and proper. Further it is argued that victim
remains with accused till last. This itself shows that deceased
Preethy Acharya and accused No.1 present till death of deceased
Preethy Acharya. It is further argued that PW. 5 supported the
case of the prosecution regarding hearing of screaming of victim.
He has also depose regarding incident. However the hostality of
this witness will not take away the case of the prosecution.

23. It is also argued that PW.7 also supported the case
regarding recovery and also drawing of the mahazar. These
witnesses PW. 2 and 7 are the independent witnesses who have
supported the case of the prosecution. It is further argued that
during the cross-examination of PW. 8 there is no denial regarding
the incident. Since there is no denial it is held to be admitted.
Further PW. 10 also depose regarding hearing of the screaming on
the said day and there is no cross-examination of the witness in
that regard. Further PW. 17 depose regarding the drinking habit of
accused No.1. He has also identified the articles recovered
during investigation.

24. Further it is argued that the medical evidence in this
case is clearly supported the case of the prosecution wherein it is
proved that the death of deceased Preethy Acharya and Veda is
SC No. 1108/2013

homicidal and other evidence specifically prove that accused No.1
was present who has committed the offence. It is further argued
that the motive is very much clear in this case. This aspect is
proved by the prosecution wherein the deceased Preethy
Acharya lodged complaint against accused No.1. Further after
lodging of the complaint enmity raised between Preethy Acharya
and accused No.1 and after coming back from the custody in
those cases the accused No.1 developed enmity and he was
intending to take revenge and in that regard he has planned to
murder Preethy Acharya and executed the same.

25. It is further argued that it is burden on the husband to
prove the incident. It is argued that there are different versions
raised by the accused. It is specifically proved that the conduct of
accused No.1 is suspicious as he was absconding from the spot
after the incident. It is also argued that the accused has first hit
Preethy Acharya and then Veda since Veda starts to scream, to
shut her the accused No.1 also killed Veda. It is also argued that
during the cross-examination accused No.1 tried to attack on the
chastity of Preethy Acharya and the said fact is not true and
correct and accused No.1 is not able to prove the same. From all
these aspects the prosecution is able to prove that accused No.1
has murdered deceased. Further it is also argued that accused
No.1 has conspired with accused No.2 regarding murder of
deceased Preethy Acharya. There are call details which took
place between accused No.1 and 2. They specifically prove that
they have conspired and there was a planning, preparation and
execution of the same by accused No.1 and 2. Hence he can also
be convicted for the offence. Since the prosecution has proved the
SC No. 1108/2013

guilt of the accused it is argued that stringent punishment is to be
imposed.

II] ARGUMENTS OF DEFENSE;

26. The counsel for the defense argued in detail in support
of his case. The pith and substance of the argument of the defense
is that firstly the counsel for the defense narrated the prosecution
case. The counsel for the defense through his argument try to
discredit the evidence of PW. 1. It is argued that the entire
evidence of PW. 1 is an after thought as there are many
contradictions and omissions in the evidence of PW.1. it is argued
that the facts narrated by the PW.1 in her evidence is not in
consonance with the case of the prosecution. It is argued that it is
not in dispute that the accused No.1 married to Preethy Acharya.
The harassment by accused No.1 to Preethy Acharya is an after
thought narrated by PW.1. It is argued regarding incident day and
the development regarding days before the incident. It is argued
that prosecution has failed to prove that there is a telephone
conversion between deceased Preethy Acharya and her mother-
PW. 1. It is further argued that police called complainant that has
not been proved by the prosecution. The counsel pointing at the
evidence of PW.1 has pointed out that PW. 1 does not know who
called her at the first instance in the morning on 18.4.2013. It is
further argued that complaint lodged by PW. 1 is an after thought.
As per the complainant the rod-MO.15 was lying beside the dead
body and in the complaint it is specifically stated the said fact and
same is marked as Ex.D.1. However as per the investigation and
the report of I.O the said rod was recovered from the drainage at
the instance of the accused No.1. It is argued that it is the case of
SC No. 1108/2013

the prosecution that in the night the said Preethy Acharya called
PW. 1 and it is stated that accused No.1 threatening Preethy
Acharya, but the prosecution has not produced any call sheet and
no evidence to that effect is produced before the court. It is also
argued that evidence of PW. 1 is not specific as because PW. 1 on
one stretch depose that she has boarded the bus from Bombay to
Bangalore in the night whereas in the other stretch she depose
that she has boarded the bus in the afternoon, there is no material
or evidence regarding her travel from Bombay to Bangalore. No
bus ticket was produced before the court to show that she started
her journey and came to Bangalore. The very fact is elicited from
evidence of PW.1 that no ticket is produced and the said ticket
had information regarding starting of journey timing of the bus and
other details. The said fact is not proved by the prosecution. This
is one of the relevant circumstance to be proved by the
prosecution. But the prosecution failed in that regard.

27. It is also argued that as per the prosecution case there is
child of one year of deceased Veda. As per the evidence of PW. 1 ,
PW. 1 says I.O. took the child to the Police Station whereas PW.
29 the IO depose that child was taken by PW. 1 and she brought
the child to the police station. There is complete contradiction in
respect of this aspect. Further it is argued that the child was there
at the time of assault on deceased as per the prosecution case.
But there is no blood stains on the child or on the child`s clothes. It
is also not revealed from the evidence that the child was subjected
to medical examination. There is complete contradiction in respect
of this aspect that PW. 1 was present at the spot. As per the
argument of the defense PW. 1 was staying with Preethy Acharya
SC No. 1108/2013

in the said house, she has not traveled from Bombay to
Bangalore. As per the defense she is the culprit. It is also argued
that with regard to harassment PW. 1 was subjected to cross-
examination and she was suggested that in both the cases
accused was acquitted, PW. 1 pleaded ignorance in that regard.
By this the defense try to discredit the entire evidence of PW. 1
that she is the interested witness and she has depose falsely
against the accused No.1.

28. The counsel for the defense also try to explain that there
is a contradiction and improvement with regard to evidence of PW.
3,4,5,6,8,9,10, these witnesses are the neighbors of accused
No.1. it is argued that PW. 3 is not an eye witness to the incident.
Pointing at the evidence of PW. 3 it is argued that he has not seen
the incident, further it is also argued that the evidence of PW. 1 is
full of contradiction. As per PW. 3 said deceased Preethy Acharya
and Veda came from Mangalore to Bangalore on 17.4.2013 in the
morning and they were standing in front of the door and when he
asked said Preethy Acharya, she told that accused No.1 is not
opening the door. When he returned in the evening said Preethy
Acharya and Veda were inside the house and when he asked said
Preethy Acharya, she told that they came from back door. Pointing
at this fact counsel for defense argued that in the entire evidence
there is no mentioning of back door to the house of accused No.1,
Even the sketch produced regarding place of incident at Ex.P.30,
there is no mention regarding back door and even in the evidence
of PW. 12-Engineer he has depose there is no back door to the
said house. It is further argued that there is complete contradiction
regarding last seen. As per PW. 3 he saw accused No.1 going out
SC No. 1108/2013

of the house in the night at 1.30, but whereas the other witnesses
have not depose in that regard. The evidence of PW. 3 is an
improvement of the stand of PW. 1.

29. It is further argued that in respect of harassment of
accused No.1 to Preethy Acharya, PW. 3 is the hear say witness.
He has not directly heard anything regarding harassment of
accused No.1 and said Preethy Acharya has not specifically
stated the said aspects to PW3. Hence the evidence of PW. 3 is
not believable. Further it is argued that the other witnesses i.e.
PW. 4,5,6,8,9 and 10 all the witnesses have turned hostile to the
case of the prosecution. They have not supported the case of the
prosecution. The prosecution has failed to prove the facts through
these witnesses.

30. In respect to the drawing of the mahazar the counsel for
the defense argued that Ex.P. 2 and 11 are conducted by the I.O.
on the same place and MO.13 and 14 are seized before A1. It is
further argued that the I.O has stated in his evidence that he
visited the incidental spot and he has searched the entire house.
When the I.O. searched entire house and premises they have not
recovered MO. 13 and 14 and this create doubt in respect of
drawing of mahazar. It is further argued that as per the evidence
of I.O. PW. 29 he has visited the spot in the morning and
conducted spot mahazar of the entire building. It is further argued
that PW. 2 and 7 were called in the morning while drawing
mahazar. But on the same day they were called again in the
evening at 5.00 p.m. When the I.O. has investigated the entire
house he could have recovered MO. 13 and 14 in the morning
itself. The said MO. 13 and 14 said to have been recovered in the
SC No. 1108/2013

evening at the instance of A1. It is further argued that if the
mahazer was drawn in the morning there was no question of
calling of PW. 2 and 7 in the evening. It is further argued that
MO. 13 and 14 are planted. As per the spot mahazar and evidence
of PW. 2 spot mahazar was conducted in the ground floor and
same is also depose by PW. 2, but again PW. 2 depose that there
is a cellar, but there is no cellar in the entire building. Hence the
evidence of PW. 2 is doubtful. It is further argued that as per PW.
7 when he visited the spot while drawing mahazar the dead body
was taken away, if that is considered Ex.P.11 is doubtful. There is
completely contradiction in the evidence of PW. 2 and 7. It is
further argued that as per PW. 1 MO. 15 iron rod was at the spot,
the said portion of evidence is marked as Ex.D.1. It is further
argued that two recoveries made in the evening at about 5.00 p.m
and the said two recoveries were conducted in one mahazar at
different places. The mahazar are to be conducted separately, but
as per prosecution it is a running mahazar. The said mahazar
conducted is not admissible in law.

31. It is further argued that with regard to the evidence of
PW. 17 it is not clear regarding the preparation by accused No.1.
the evidence of PW. 17 is not believable as because he being the
cashier does not know what is the amount and he does not
disclose regarding receipt of purchase of three beer cans. By this it
can be inferred that the prosecution failed to prove the
preparation by the accused.

32. It is further argued that with respect to the medical
evidence as per evidence of PW. 26 the Doctor received
information on 17/8.4.2013 between 10.30 am and 11.30 am. The
SC No. 1108/2013

said piece of evidence is contrary to the prosecution case. Further
it is argued that as per the PM report there is struggle injuries on
the dead body of Veda,but to substantiate same no examination is
conducted on accused to prove the fact that there was struggle
between A1 and deceased Veda. Even the nails of deceased were
not examined. No particulars were collected regarding Ex.P. 53.
Further it is argued that as per the prosecution case the deceased
drunk beer which was brought byA1. As per PM report the
contents of beer not found in the body and also no other poison
were detected. But it is the case of the prosecution that the beer
tins were empty. Further accused also secured subsequently on
the next day. Even there is no evidence to show that accused were
detected with alcohol content in his body. If this fact is considered,
the prosecution case in this regard is not believable. Further it is
also argued that as per the FSL report the blood is that of human
and it belongs to `A` group. However it is not forthcoming from the
FSL report that deceased blood was identified and same is tallied
with the blood found on MO. 15. Even the said FSL report is not
helpful for the prosecution to establish the fact that MO. 15 was
use to assault deceased. Further it is argued that PW. 26 has not
examined the surface of the alleged iron rod to establish the
connection between the injuries and the weapon use. The said PM
report is not according to medical manual. Hence the
prosecution also fails in order to establish the medical evidence.
Further it is also argued that the inquest is also not properly
conducted. Inquest has to be held in the house itself not in the
hospital, but in this case the inquest was conducted at KIMS
hospital. Further it is also argued that in Ex.P. 41 and 42 the
SC No. 1108/2013

inquest reports there is over writing. As per this it can be said that
the inquest is also not properly conducted.

33. It is also argued that as per the case of the prosecution
A1 and A2 conspired to eliminate Preethy Acharya. It is the case of
the prosecution that A1 called A2 and A2 instigated A1 to take
away life of deceased. A2 supported A1 in the commission of
crime. It is argued that call details of A1 an dA2 have not been
collected, if that is collected then there is possibility to prove
whether A1 and A2 have conspired to commit crime. Investigating
Officer has not properly conducted investigation. The call details
are not marked in the present case. Hence the prosecution fails to
prove the connection between A1 and A2 in the commission of the
present crime. It is further argued that the conduct of the deceased
Preety Acharya is to be looked into. The marriage of deceased
with A1 is the 2nd marriage.

34. The prosecution case in respect of motive is weekly
established, eventhough she lodged two complaints against A1.
Those cases were ended with acquittal for lack of evidence. It is
also argued that the said documents in respect of 2 cases are
not collected during investigation and they have been produced
subsequently as per Ex.P.12 to P. 17. It is further argued that after
lapse of 9 months of filing of these two cases the incident took
place. Hence this cannot be connected to the present case. PW. 1
and PW. 29 colluded with each other filed the present false case
against accused. It is also argued that PW. 1 assaulted deceased
Preethy Acharya and the persons who assaulted know from which
weapon the deceased was assaulted. Hence PW. 1 specifically
speaks that deceased are assaulted with iron rod and she has
SC No. 1108/2013

specifically depose in her evidence and complaint that said rod
was lying beside dead bodies. The limb of argument of the
defense is that PW. 1 committed the offence. Hence she
specifically knows the details of the crime and she has colluded
with I.O. has created the witness and evidence.

35. It is also argued that there is lot of discrepancy in the
case of the prosecution and the evidence are full of contradictions
and omissions and the many witnesses were turned hostile. Hence
the prosecution is not able to prove the links between
circumtances. There is no link between each circumstance and if
the link is broken the entire case of the prosecution fails. There is a
lack of evidence in the prosecution case. The prosecution is
unable to prove the circumstance and the chain of circumstance is
not completed. Hence the accused deserves acquittal.

36. In the line of legal position counsel for the defense
argues that there is a delay in filing the FIR, it is the evidence of
PW. 29 that he has visited the spot at 7.30 am, he had not
registered FIR till PW. 1 lodges complaint, since there is a delay
the same is hit by
section 154
of Cr.P.C. It is also argued that the
witness shown in the charge sheet are the interested witnesses.
Hence the evidence of these witnesses cannot be relied upon. It is
further argued that prosecution must prove all the circumstances
in the present case. Even including the blood stains are not proved
with the weapon use in the crime. It is further argued that if 2
views are possible in a case, the benefit may be given to accused.
The counsel for the accused relied upon;

1. (1975) 4 SCC 106, 2. AIR 1993 SCC 2644, 3. ILR 2013
SC No. 1108/2013

KAR 992, 4. (1991) 3 SCC 609, 5. 2014 (AIR) SCW 2354, 6. 2019
(1) KLR 35(SC), 7. ILR 2019 Kar 4119.

In conclusion the defense argues that the prosecution not proved
the presence of accused at the incidental spot on the date of
incident and assaulted the deceased. Hence the prosecution failed
to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt and the benefit of
doubt should be extended to accused and they may be acquitted
for the alleged offence.

III] GLIMPS OF WITNESSES;

37. Before appreciating the evidence it is better to have a
glimpse on the evidence given by all the witnesses.

PW. 1 is the mother of deceased Preethy Acharya, she
depose that CW.4 is her husband, CW.5 is her Aunt, deceased
Veda is the daughter of her brother-in-law, the accused no.1 is the
husband of Preethy Acharya and he has killed Preethy Acharya
and Veda and they are residing at Thana of Maharastra and
accused and deceased were residing at Bangalore and A1
Chandrashekar is the 2nd husband of Preethy Acharya and her 1st
marriage was performed in the year 2010 with one Vishwanath
and 2 daughters were born to them by name Purvi and Palvi and
there was dispute in the house of her husband hence Preethy
Acharya took divorce from Vishwanath. She further depose that in
the year 2010 the accused no.1 being the musician introduced to
them by one Gopal Krishna at Mangalore and they came to know
that accused no.1 Chandrashekar is also a divorced person and
he is in search of a bride and in this background they visited the
SC No. 1108/2013

house of A1 and after satisfied they performed the marriage of
Preethy Acharya with A1 at Thana and then Preethy Acharya and
two children started to live with accused No.1 at Bengaluru. She
further depose that there was difference arose between A1 and
Preethy Acharya since Preethy Acharya intends to do job and A1
started to consume alcohol daily and he use to tell her to treat
properly with his friends. She further depose that Preethy Acharya
joined as a teacher in a school by name 'Little Flower' and A1
without any earnings use to take alcohol and started to harass her
physically and in this regard she advised them and in the month of
August 2012 Preethy Acharya informed them through phone and
hence they advised her to take police protection and then she
lodged a complaint also at Girinagar P.S. She further depose that
A1 developed illicit relationship with maid and when Preethy
Acharya questioned he use to abuse her.

38. She further depose that on the basis of the complaint
lodged by Preethy Acharya Girinagar Police arrested him and
subsequently he obtained bail and again started to give
harassment to her. She further depose that in the month of
September Preethy Acharya again lodged complaint and then
police again arrested him and subsequently he took bail and again
started to give mental and physical harassment. She further
depose that in the year 2013 her husband became ill and in the
month of April she and Veda visited the house of accused no.1 and
Preethy Acharya at Bangalore and after two days she, Veda,
Preethy Acharya and two children have gone to Mangalore and
after Ugadi festival they visited Dharmastala, Subramanya, Katilu
and they left to Mumbai and on 15.04.2013 Preethy Acharya her
SC No. 1108/2013

children and Veda left to Bangalore and on 16.04.2013 they
reached the Bangalore and she further depose that accused no.1
was harassing her daughter Preethy Acharya and on next day
when she was on the way to Bangalore she received phone call
from Girinagar Police that her daughter and Veda are murdered
and they reached the house and saw that A1 was not there then
they lodged complaint as per Ex.P1 and she saw that on one side
the dead body of Preethy Acharya was there on another side dead
body of Veda was there and the blood was spread and the police
drawn the mahazer as per Ex.P2 and took her signature as per
Ex.P2(a) and there was injury on the head and she further depose
that accused no.1 learnt that Preethy Acharya will shift to Mumbai
and she will ask for share in the property and hence he stabbed
with rod. She further depose that she identified the photos and
MO.1 to 7 and 9 to 12 and Ex.P1 to 10 and after Post Morton they
received the dead bodies and performed the cremation. She
further identified the signature of deceased on complaints and the
complaints dated 14.08.2012 and 12.09.2012, FIR, Charge Sheet,
Invitation Card, Marriage Certificate are marked as Ex.P12 to 19.
she further depose that A1 was harassing her for 2 years and then
killed her and A2 is also involved in the crime.

39. PW. 2 is the spot mahazer witnesses and he depose
that on 18.04.2013 he and CW.3 were present at near Nanda
Gokula Kalyana Mantapa where the police drawn mahazer and he
saw that two ladies were killed and there was blood and the police
took the sample blood and seized two pillows and three king
fishers bottles and sealed them and took photos and took their
signatures to Ex.P.2 mahazer. He identified signature Ex.P2(b) and
SC No. 1108/2013

also identified MO1 to 7 and the photos at Ex.P1 to 10. He further
depose that he came to know that A1 is the musician and murder
is took place at his house and on the same day at about 5.15 PM
when he and CW.4 was at Brahmi Bakery police called him and
stated that the accused is cought hold and at his instance the
police have seized night track pant and black and red colour shirt
from his room and the police drawn the mahazer and seized the
same and he also took police to 50 mts away from the house and
produced the rod. The police drawn the mahazer-Ex.P11 and
seized the rod. PW.2 identified his signature as per Ex.P11(a) and

(b) and he also identified MO.13, 14, 15.

40. PW. 3 is the Neighbor of A1 he depose that PW.7 is wife
and residing at Building no.1113/N, 2 nd Floor and A1 is residing at
Ground Floor and he know CW.8 to 11 and A1 is the musician and
he know his wife and Veda and he further depose that Preethy
Acharya is the 3rd wife of A1 and they were cardinal initially and
later difference arose between them when she joined as Teacher
and later she resigned. He further depose that A1 performed
music Goa and Maldives and Preethy Acharya use to told to his
wife that there is financial problem and A1 use to quarrel and use
to give harassment and hence Preethy Acharya lodged complaint
at Girinagar Police Station. He further depose that police arrested
him and subsequently A1 took bail and again police arrested him
and he again took bail. PW.3 further depose that Preethy Acharya
told before his wife that A1 is giving life threatening and she will
shift and she gave resignation to the job. PW.3 further depose that
the parents of Preethy Acharya advised A1. PW.3 further depose
that in April 2013 Preethy Acharya visited Mangalore and she
SC No. 1108/2013

expressed that she will shift to Mangalore and hence she returned
to Bangalore on April 2017 took belongings and on the next day
she told that A1 is not opening the door and she entered from
back door and then A1 started quarrel and on the same day in the
mid-night he heard the screening and hence he and his wife have
came out side and saw that A1 is going out side and then they
entered the house on the next day at 8.30 AM and saw that
Preethy Acharya and Veda were murdered and two pillows 3 bear
bottles and the mother of Preethy Acharya was present and she
told that A1 killed her daughter and Veda. PW.3 further depose
that police visited the spot and drawn the mahazer and took the
photos and he identified the Ex.P2 to 10 and MO.3 to 7 and the
police recorded the statement and he also identified A1 before the
court.

41. Learned PP treated witnesses as partly hostile and in
the cross-examination he admitted that Preethy Acharya use to tell
before them that A1 is not doing any job and always use to abuse
her in drunk and condition and use to abuse and assault her. He
has stated this matter before police. He also admitted that he know
that A1 did not open the door of the house and he know about the
dispute between them and he saw that on the date of incident in
the mid-night at about 1.30 AM A1 left the house and in the mid-
night the neighbors also discussed about A1 and he stated all the
above things before the police.

42. PW.4 is also the neighbors of A1 and she is residing at
2nd Floor of the building and she depose that A1is residing at
Ground Floor she further depose that she know A1 and Preethy
Acharya use to tell that A1 is giving harassment and she is the 2 nd
SC No. 1108/2013

wife of A1 and she do not know about the habits of A1. PW.4
further depose that she came to know that Preethy Acharya was
murdered but she do not know who killed her and on the date of
incident at 7.30 AM she came to about the murder and one age old
lady was residing with them and she came to know that another
lady is also murdered, but she do not know her name and after the
incident she did not saw the dead bodies and A1 was not present
on that day. She identified Ex.P25 to 8 and she further depose that
she came to know that A1 has committed the offence and the
police have noted their names but not recorded the statements.
Learned PP treated witnesses as partly hostile and cross
examined her at length wherein she admitted that deceased use to
tell before her that A1 is giving harassment to her and A1 is not
taking care of children. But she denied that she gave statement
before police in this regard.

43. PW. 5 who is also the neighbor of accused No.1 depose
that CW. 8 is his wife and he is residing in 2 nd floor and A1 is
residing in ground floor and there are totally 7 houses are there in
their building and he know CW. 6,7,10 and 11 and he know
Preethy Acharya who is the wife of A1 and she is the 2 nd wife of A1
and at the time of marriage she had 2 children and A1 is the
Musician and Preethy Acharya was a teacher and she was
murdered and during her life time after about 7 months from the
date of marriage she use to tell before them that A1 is harassing
her and at about 10.30 to 11.00 pm he heard the screaming sound
from their house and one aged lady was also residing witht hem
and he further depose that about prior to 18 months he in the
morning he came to know that Preethy Acharya and another lady
SC No. 1108/2013

are killed and he came to know through news paper and TV that
A1 killed them. He further depose that police have not recorded
his statement but noted down his name, by seeing Ex.P.3 and 4
photos he depose that he cannot identify the persons in the photo
since they are ugly. Learned PP treated the witness as partly
hostile and in the cross-examination by the learned PP he denied
that before the police he gave statement to the effect that `Preethy
Acharya use to tell that A1 is giving physical and mental
harassment to her, he is not earning any income, he is a drunker,
he use to abuse and assault her and threaten her with
consequences and one maid by name Hemalatha is working and
Preethy Acharya lodged complaint against A1 and hence police
arrested him and she was doing a teacher job.

44. He admitted that he stated before the police that on
16.4.2013 Preethy, Veca and 2 children have returned from
Mangalore and A1 had not opened the door and when A1 gone
outside they entered the house and subsequently A1 came to
house and started quarrel with them and hence he gave statement
before the police.

45. He denied that before the police he gave statement that
on 17/18.4.2013 in the midnight they heard the screaming sound
and they came out of the house and after some time the
screaming sound was stopped and they heard that child was
wheeping and when they were stepping down A1 gone out of the
gate and they thought there may be quarrel btween Preethy
Acharchay and A1 and hence they returned to their house. He
further denied that the mother of Preethy Acharya had told before
them that A1 is harassing her and threatening her with dire
SC No. 1108/2013

consequences and hence she lodged the complaint and in this
regard she advised to them and hence A1 hatched plan to kill her
and Veda and she advised them, inspite of that A1 stabbed with
rod and killed Preethy Acharya and Veda and he gave statement
to that effect.

46. PW. 6 is also the neighbor of A1 and he depose that he
know Preethy Acharya andA1 and he do not know the dispute
between them and A1 questioned to the wife of PW. 6 that
whether any complaint is filed by Preethy Acharya and he stated
that since Preethy Acharga lodged complaint once he was
arrested. He further depose that he came to know through TV that
Preethy Acharya and Veda are killed and he further depose that
he had not heard any sound on the date of incident and not saw
A1 was going out and not advised A1 and Preethy Acharya. He
turned hostile to the case of the prosecution and denied the
suggestions put to him.

47. PW. 7 is the spot mahazar witness and he depose that
on 18.4.2013 at about 10.00 am at the request of the police he
and one Manjunath visited the spot and saw 2 dead bodies and
there was injury on head and police collected the blood samples
and seized the pillows, 3 kingfisher tin bottle, track pant, T shirt,
rod, and police drawn mahazar-Ex.P.2 and he put his signature
and he identified MO.1 to 7 and MO.13 to 15 and the seizure
mahazar Ex.P.11 and the accused before the court.

48. PW. 8 the neighbor has depose that she hails from
Mangalore and she know Preethy Acharya and A1 and she came
to know from Preethy Acharya that A1 was harassing her and
SC No. 1108/2013

hence she intends to shift to Bombay and PW. 8 gave tolerance to
her and helped her andafter about 2 days she came to know that
Veda and Preethy Acharya are killed in their house. Learned P.P
treated the witness as partly hostile and in the cross-examination
by the PP she denied the suggestion that on the date of incident
in the mid night they heard the screaming sound and gone to the
house of A1 and A1 gone out by opening the gate and she gave
the statement before the police that she saw that A1 gone out of
the house. In the cross-examination by A1 she depose that she did
not saw A1 was going out side.

49. PW. 9 is also the neighbor, he depose that he know
deceased Preethy Acharya and A1 and once deceased expressed
that their life is not good and she plans to shift to Mumbai and
subsequently he came to know that she was killed, but he did not
saw the dead body and police recorded his statement as per Ex.P.

24. He turned hostile in part and in the cross-examination by the
PP he denied that he and his wife visited the house of A1 and
they saw that A1 gone out of the house on the date of incident and
inspite of that he is deposing falsely and in the cross-examination
by the A1 he depose that Preethy Acharya had not told before him
that she was having problems with so many people.

50. PW. 10 is also the neighbor of A1 and she depose that
she do not know Preethy Acharya and she do not know who were
residing with A1, she do not know A1, in the month of April 2013
at about 1.00 am she heard the screaming voice of ladies 2 times,
but she could know from which house the screaming voice heard
and on the next morning she saw police at the spot and she came
to know that a murder is occurred and she did not saw the dead
SC No. 1108/2013

bodies and she stated before the police that she heard the
screaming voice. She further depose that those ladies have not
told before her any matter and the public were talking that A1
assaulted those ladies with rod. Learned PP treated the witness as
partly hostile and in the cross-examination by the PP she denied
the suggestion that she know that Preethy Acharya lodged 2-3
complaint against A1 and Preethy Acharya told before her that A1
is harassing her and in this regard she gave statement before the
police as per Ex.P. 25.

51. PW. 11 is the Head Master of the school by name Martin
Luthar where the children of deceased were studying and he
depose that as per the request (Ex.P.26) of deceased Preethy
Acharya they issued T.C. of the children and Ex.P.27 is the copy of
T.C. and Ex.P.26(a) is the signature of PW. 11. Learned PP
treated the witness as partly hostile and in the cross-examination
by the PP he denied the suggestion that Preethy Achaya told
before him that A1 is giving harassment to her and hence she
intends to shift to Mumbai and hence she is seeking for T.C. In this
regard PW. 11 gave statement before the police as per Ex.P. 28.

52. PW. 12 is the Assistant Commissioner of PWD office
and he depose that as per th request of the PI of Girinagar P.S. he
drawn the sketch (Ex.P. 30) of the spot and sent to the police. He
further depose that there is chance of hearing the sound of
screaming from the incidental spot. In the cross-examination he
depose that he had not inquired whether is back door for the
house.

53. PW. 13 is the P.C. who was escorting the dead body of
SC No. 1108/2013

Veda and he depose that the PI has drawn the inquest
panchanama at Kims Hospital and recorded the statement of
Amitha and Vikram and after inquest mahazar they handed over
the dead body to relatives.

54. PW. 14 the PSI has depose that on the date of incident
they caught hold the accused Chandrashekhar at Sattellite Bus
Stand and brought himto the PS and produced before the PI
alongwith report Ex.P.32.

55. PW. 15 is the ASI of Girinagar P.S. has depose that on
18.4.2013 he was escorting the dead body of Preethy Acharya at
Kims Hospital and at that time the Tahsildar has drawn the inquest
panchanama and the panchas Nagaraj, Ganesh and Girish and
the relatives by name Amitha and Vikram were present at that
time and after inquest mahazar they handed over the dead body
to the relatives.

56. PW. 16 the Head Mistress of Little Flower Public School
has depose that deceased Preethy Acharya was working as
Teacher in their school from 2011 to 2013 and she has disclosed
before her that there is lot of problem in her life, her husband is
not taking care and he is having relationship with another lady and
her 2 children were also studying in that school. She further
depose that on 10.4.2013 she gave resignation (Ex.P.33) to the
job and stated that she is having threaten to her life in Bangalore
and hence she is planing to shift to Bombay and after few days
she received phone call that Preethy Acharya is killed and police
have recorded her statement. She further depose that she had not
seen the husband of deceased Preethy Acharya.
SC No. 1108/2013

57. In th cross-examination by the accused No.1 she
depose that their school was closed from 10.4.2013 to June first
week and she denied that deceased Preethy Acharya had not told
before her that she has no well wishers in Bengaluru.

58. PW. 17 the worker of the Pavan Bar has depose that
A1 Chandrashekar use to visit their shop and use to take parcel of
tin bear also and he stated before the police that on 17.4.2013 at
about 10.30 pm A.1 purchased 2 kingfisher straint bear and one
kingfisher drought tin bear and he identified MO. 5 to 7 the tine of
bear bottle and he also identified the A1 before the court. In the
cross-examination by the accused No.1 he depose that he had not
issued any bill for purchase of bear by A1 and A1 use to visit their
shop since 6 months and on 18.4.2013 when police visited their
shop another main cashier was present in the shop.

59. PW. 18 the HC has depose that they brought the
accused No.2 Prabhakar and produced before the P.I with their
report as per Ex.P. 34 and he identified A2 before the court.

60. PW. 19 is the HC who has handed over 12 Mos to FSL
and submitted the acknowledgement -Ex.P. 36 and 37 and his
report is marked as Ex.P. 38 and he identified MO. 1 to 15 before
the court.

61. PW. 20 is the HC who has submitted the FIR-Ex.P. 40
to the court and his first information is marked as Ex.P. 1.

62. PW. 21 is the cousin sister of deceased Preethy
Acharya and Veda and she depose that the mother of deceased
Preethy Acharya who is her aunt has intimated her that A1 killed
both and immediately she rushed to the house of A1 and came to
SC No. 1108/2013

know that dead bodies are shifted to KIMS and hence she visited
Hospital and saw the dead bodies and the police recorded her
statement and she further depose that during life time deceased
Preethy Acharya use to tell regarding the harassment of her
husband and she lodged complaint also and she identified A1
before the court.

63. PW. 22 and 23 are the inquest mahazar witnesses and
they depose that the Tahsildar drawn the inquest mahazar on the
dead of 2 ladies at KIMS Hospital as per Ex.P.41 and 42 and they
put their signatures as per Ex.P.41(a) and 42(a) and Ex.P.43 is the
notice issued to PW. 23.

64. PW. 24 Premavathi the retired official of Postal
Department has depose that A1 was working as Postal Assistant
and he left the job long back and he use to call them rarely, but he
was not telling any personal matters and she do not know about
his marriage and she came to know that he was arrested in
connection to his wife death and the police have recorded her
statement in this regard. She turned hostile and in the cross-
examination by the PP she denied the suggestion to the effect that
she gave statement (Ex.P.44) before the police stating that A1
took VRS and use to call her and tell that there is dispute between
him and his wife and she is asking for share in the property and on
17.4.2013 he again called her and told that Preethy Acharya
brought her sister and both are quarrelling with him and in this
regard PW. 24 advised him to take the help of Lawyer. She denied
the suggestion that in order to help the accused she is deposing
falsely.
SC No. 1108/2013

65. PW. 25 is also the retired official of Postal Department
and he has depose that A1 was working as Postal Assistant and
he left the job long back and he use to call them rarely, but he was
not telling any personal matters and she do not know about his
marriage and she came to know that he was arrested in
connection to his wife death and the police have recorded her
statement in this regard. She turned hostile and in the cross-
examination by the PP she denied the suggestion to the effect that
she gave statement (Ex.P.45) before the police stating that A1
took VRS and use to call her and tell that there is dispute between
him and his wife

66. PW.26 Dr. Naveen Kumar depose that he is working as
Associate Professor in KIMS since past 10 years. On 18-04-2013
at 2-05p.m he received requisition from special and executive
magistrate of Bengaluru South Taluk to conduct PM on deceased
Preethy Acharya aged about 36 years. Body was identified by ASI
Umashankar. On the same day he conducted the PM examination
from 2-10 to 3-10pm. Information furnished by the police as to, on
17/18-04-2013 between 10-30pm to 8-30am, the deceased and
her cousin said to have been murdered by husband of Preethy
Acharya, at her residence within Girinagara PS limits.

67. On external examination he found dead body of female
aged about 36 years measuring 158cm in length, moderately built
and nourished, light brown in complexion. Rigor mortis present all
over the body. Post mortem staining present over back of the body.
Dried blood stains present over the exposed parts of the body. He
has noted down the following external injuries:
SC No. 1108/2013

1. Lacerated wound, measuring 6x0.5 cms x bone deep present
on the right parietal region of the scalp 7cms from the top of the
right ear. The margins of the wound are irregular, ragged and the
edges are undermined.

2. Lacerated wound, measuring 4x0.5 cm x bone deep present on
the right temporal region of the scalp 2 cm above fro the top of the
right ear. The margins of the wound are irregular, ragged and the
edges are undermined.

3. Lacerated wound, measuring 2.5x0.5 cms x bone deep present
behind the right ear. The margins of the wound are irregular,
ragged and the edges are blunt.

4. Lacerated wound, measuring 2x0.5 cms x subcutaneous tissue
deep present on the right ear lobule. The margins of the would are
irregular, ragged and the edges are blunt.

5. Lacerated wound, measuring 4x0.5 cms x bone deep present
over the right forehead, 3 cms above from the right eyebrow. The
margins of the wound are irregular, ragged and the edges are
undermined.

6. Lacerated wound, measuring 1x0.5 cm x bone deep present on
the lateral aspect of right eye. The margins of the wound are
irregular, ragged and the edges are undermined.

7. Lacerated wound, measuring 3.5x0.5 cm x bone deep present
on the left side of forehead, 1 cm above left eye. The margins of
the wound are irregular, ragged and the edges are undermined.

On Internal Examination he found:

On opening the body he found the following injuries: Scalp:

contuse over right temporo-parietal regions measuring 14x4cms.
SC No. 1108/2013

Right temporalis muscle contuse.

Skull: Linear fracture present in the middle cranial fossa
passing through and through dividing the base of the skull into 2
halves, measuring 16 cms.

Meninges: Torn at fractured sites
Brain & Spinal Cord: Brain- covered by subdural and subarachnoid
haemorrhage present all over the cerebral hemisphere.
Stomach & its contents: Stomach contains partially digested rice
meal. Smell- fruity odour and Mucosa Normal.
All other organs are intact.

All injuries are ANTEMORTEM in nature.

Following clothes present over the body:

1. One black colour petticoat, blood stained

2. One cream colour nighty, blood stained.

3. One blue colour kacha.

All the clothes were air dried, packed, sealed, labeled and
handed over to the concerned Police along with the sample
seal.

Time since death:12 to 24 hours prior to conducting post
mortem examination.

He has collected the blood, stomach and its contents, half of
each kidney and pieces of liver sent to FSL for chemical
analysis.

He has opined the death is due to SHOCK AND
HAEMORRHAGE has a result of SEVERE HEAD INJURY
sustained. The letter given by the Spl.and Executive Magistrate
for conducting PM of the deceased Preethy Acharya is marked
as Ex.P.46 and signature is marked as Ex.P46(a). PM report is
SC No. 1108/2013

marked as Ex.P.47 and signature is marked as Ex.P.47(a). he
identified the apparels worn by the deceased, which are
already marked as MO.8 to 10. Witness identified his signature
on the label affixed on MO.8 to 10 are marked as MO. 8(a) to
10(a).

Then he sent requisition to the FSL on 25-04-2013 for
chemical analysis along with blood and viscera. The request letter
and signature are marked as Ex.P.48 and 48(a). The head injury
sustained by the deceased could be caused by iron rod which is
already marked as MO.15. In the further examination in chief he
depose that on 18-04-2013 at 3-10p.m. he received the requisition
from PI Girinagara PS to conduct PM on deceased Veda aged
about 38 years. Body was identified by PC No.12023. On the
same day he conducted the PM examination from 3-15 to 4-15pm.
Information furnished by the police as to, on 17/18-04-2013
between 10-30pm to 8-30am, the deceased along with her cousin
said to have been committed by her cousin's husband, at her
residence within Girinagara PS limits.

He further depose that on external examination he found dead
body of female aged about 38 years measuring 155cm in length,
moderately built and nourished, dark brown in complexion. Rigor
mortis present all over the body. Post mortem staining present
over back of the body. Dried blood stains present over the exposed
parts of the body. He has noted down the following external
injuries:
SC No. 1108/2013

Lacerated wound, measuring 3 x 0.5 cms x bone deep
present over the right parietal region of the scalp 10cms above
the right eyebrow. The margins of the wound are irregular, ragged
and the edges are undermined.

Lacerated wound, measuring 6x0.5 cm x bone deep present
over the right parietal region of the scalp 6 cm below the injury
No.1. The margins of the wound are irregular, ragged and the
edges are undermined.

Lacerated wound, measuring 6x0.5 cms x bone deep
present over the upper part the left parietal region of the scalp. 10
cm above the left eyebrow. The margins of the wound are
irregular, ragged and the edges are undermined.

Lacerated wound, measuring 9x0.5 cms x bone deep
present over the left parietal region of the scalp. 2cm below the
injury NO.3. The margins of the would are irregular, ragged and
the edges are Undermined.

Lacerated wound, measuring 4x0.5 cms x bone deep
present over the left parietal region of the scalp, 1 cms below the
injury NO.4. The margins of the wound are irregular, ragged and
the edges are undermined.

Contusion measuring 8x9 cm present over the middle part of
the back of the both sides of fore arm
Contusion measuring 4x4 cm present over the back of the
both hands.

On Internal Examination he found:

On opening the scalp contuse over right temporo parietal
regions measuring 7 X 5 Cms. Right temporalis muscle contuse
SC No. 1108/2013

contusion present over left parietal region measuring 3 X 2 cms.

Skull vault-Sutural fracture present over right coronal region
measuring for 15cms and anterior part of saggital suture for 3cms.

Base of Skull Linear fracture extending from left temporal
bonde to left side of middle cranial fossa measuring 5cms. Linear
fracture extending from right temporal bone to right side of middle
cranial fossa measuring 7 cms.

Meninges : Torn at fractured sites.

Brain : Covered by subdural and subarachnoid haemorrhage
present all over the cerebral hemispheres.

Stomach & its contents: Stomach contains partially digested
rice meal. Smell- fruity odour and Mucosa Normal.
All other organs are intact.

All injuries are ANTEMORTEM in nature.

Following clothes present over the body:
One orange colour petticoat, blood stained
One multi colour nighty, blood stained.

All the clothes were air dried, packed, sealed, labeled and
handed over to the concerned Police along with the sample
seal.

Time since death:12 to 24 hours prior to conducting post
mortem examination.

He has collected the blood, stomach and its contents, half of
each kidney and pieces of liver sent to FSL for chemical
analysis.

He has opined the death is due to SHOCK AND
HAEMORRHAGE has a result of SEVERE HEAD INJURY
SC No. 1108/2013

sustained. The letter given by the Girinagar Police station for
conducting PM of the deceased Veda. The signature is
identified by the witness hence document is marked as Ex.P.49
and signature is marked as Ex.P49(a). PM report is marked as
Ex.P.50 and signature is marked as Ex.P.50(a). he identified
the apparels worn by the deceased, which are already marked
as MO.11 and 12. Witness identified his signature on the label
affixed on MO.11 and 12 are marked as MO.11(a) and 12(a).
He further depose that he sent requisition to the FSL on 25-04-
2013 for chemical analysis along with blood and viscera. The
request letter and signature are marked as Ex.P.51 and 51(a).
The head injury sustained by the deceased could be caused by
iron rod which is already marked as MO.15. He further depose
that on 01.06.2013 he received the requisition from Police
Inspector to furnish further opinion regarding weapon
examination. The said requisition is marked as Ex.P.52,
signature is marked as Ex.P.52(a). He further depose that he
received one sealed packet with seal intact on opening he
found an iron rod measuring 37.5 cm in length 9 cm in
circumference, 2 cm in diameter with measures 1800 grms. And
reddish brown colour stains present over the surface of the
weapon at places.

Opinion of PM report No. 178/2013 dt. 18.04.2013.
He opined that the external injuries from 1 to 7 and
external and internal head injury could be cause by the type of
weapon examined, leading to fatal head injury causing her
death.

Opinion of PM report No. 179/2013 dt. 18.04.2013.
SC No. 1108/2013

He opined that the external injuries from 1 to 7 and
external and internal head injury could be cause by the type of
weapon examined, leading to fatal head injury and causing
her death. External injury No.6 and 7 could have been cause
during struggle( defense wounds). After examination the
weapon was initialed, packed in the same packet and sealed
and handed over to the concerned police along with sample
seal. The report given by him is marked as Ex.P.53, the
signature is marked as Ex.P.53(a). The sample seal given for
the weapon is marked as Ex.P.54, the signature is marked as
Ex.P.54(a) He has identified MO.15.

In the Cross examination by accused No.1 he denied the
suggestions that he has not received request and he has not
conducted any post mortem examination of both the deceased and
he has not been gone through the contents of the documents and
he conducted the PM examination of the deceased 10 days
earlier to the alleged murder as per the dated mentioned in
Ex.P.52. He also denied that he has not wrote any document to
the I.O and he fabricated PM reports as per the convenience of
I.O. in order to falsely implicate us and measurement mentioned
regarding length, circumference and diameter are contradicting to
each other and the circumference of an object is always triple
times of its diameter. He also denied the suggestion that as per
the universal principal the circumference is always 3.1 time of
diameter, which is pi value. PI is short form of Periphery which is
circumference and instead of mentioning 6cm of circumference he
has mentioned 9cm and he has not received the iron rod and he
SC No. 1108/2013

has not examined it and he has given false report as per the
convenience of I.O. in order to implicate us and he has told to
PW.21 accused have committed murder of the deceased after
giving them Alcohol to drink.

68. He also denied the suggestion that he has not
examined the rod M.O.15. and the injuries sustained by both the
deceased are not able to cause by the MO 15 and injuries
mentioned in the PM report are caused only when assault is made
with a long, thin rod or object with sufficient force. He depose that
before conducting PM examination he has prepared the notes on
findings on the dead body. But he has not produce the same
before the court. He denied that PM examination is not done in
accordance with protocol opinion given as per the request of the
police in order to support their case and he has given false
evidence.

69. PW. 27 The Tahsildar has depose that on 18.4.2013 as
per the phone message and request letter of the Girinagar police
he visited KIMS hospital and he issued notice to the panchas CW.
22 to 24 and drawn the inquest mahazar of one dead body in the
presence of panchas, the request letter of the police is marked as
Ex.P. 55 and his signature is marked as Ex.P.55(a) and he depose
that since he has the power to examine the dead body of a
woman whose death occurred within 7 years of marriage and the
marriage of Preethy Acharya performed in the year 2010 and
death occurred in the year 2013 he examined the dead body of
Preethy Acharya only. On examination he found cut injury on left
eye and right eye and head and he noted down the injuries and
SC No. 1108/2013

handed over the dead body to PM examination, he also recorded
the statements of CW. 20 and 21 wherein they stated that Preethy
Acharya was a school teacher and her marriage is the third
marriage with accused No.1 and A1 use to harass her and in this
regard she lodged complaint against him and police arrested him
and he was released on bail and in that grudge he was threatening
her and intending to give divorce and on 17.4.2013 at about 10.30
am under the influence of alcohol he attacked Preethy Acharya
and when Veda intervened he kill both. He identified the Ex.P. 41
and his signature is marked as Ex.P.41(b), the letter is marked
as Ex.P.46 and inquest mahazar is marked as Ex.p.56, he
identified the clothes of deceased as per MO. 8 to 11.

70. PW. 28 the P.C. of Girinagar PS has depose that on
27.4.2013 as per the direction of the PI he has received two PM
reports and 13 articles from the KIMS hospital, the PM reports are
marked as Ex.P.57 and the articles are marked as MO. 8 to 13. He
identified the PM reports and the Mos before the court.

71. PW. 29 the IO has depose that he received the
complaint from the complainant-Ex.P.1 Smt. Geetha P.Acharya
and registered Cr. No. 125/2013 for the offence punishable u/sec.
302 of
IPC
and sent the FIR-Ex.P.40 and Ex.P.1(b) and
Ex.P.40(b) is his signature and he deputed the staff to trace the
accused and then visited the spot and drawn the mahazar as per
Ex.P.2 and collected blood samples, 2blood stained pillows, 2
Kingfisher strong and one kingfisher draught bear bottle which are
marked as MO. 1 to 7 and obtained the signatures of panchas and
identified his signatures as MO. 1(a) to MO. 7(a) and he took the
photos of the bodies and spot, the said photos are marked as
SC No. 1108/2013

Ex.P.3 to P.6, Ex.P.3(a) to Ex.P.6(a) and Ex.P.10(a) are his
signatures. He further depose that he shifted the dead bodies to
KIMS hospital and sent requisition-Ex.p.55 to Tahsildar to conduct
inquest, Ex.P.55(a) is his signature. He further depose tht at about
11.30 am the accused was produced before him and he arrested
him and then visited KIMS hospital and conducted inquest on the
dead body of Veda in the presence of panchas CW. 25 to 27 by
giving notice to them, the said notice and inquest mahazar are
marked as Ex.P. 42 and 43, Ex.P.42(b) and Ex.P.43(b) are his
signatures. He further depose that he sent requisition -Ex.P.49 to
the Doctor to conduct PM examination, as such the Doctor
conducted PM as per Ex.P.58 and Ex.P.58(a) is his signature.
Then he recorded the statements of CW. 20 to 27 and thereafter
recorded the statement of the accused which is marked as Ex.P.
59 and he gave statement to the effect that he will produce the
blood stain clothes and the rod which was use for commisison
offence. Hence at the instance of the accused, he, panchas and
the staff alongwith accused went to the house of accused and from
the bed room he has produced blood stained shirt and track pant
which are marked as MO13 and MO. 14, the signatures of the IO
are marked as MO. 13(a) and 14(a) . he further depose that the
accused took them near drainage lane and from there he has
produced the blood stained rod measuring 1  feet and hence he
has seized the same and packed and sealed and drawn the
mahazar-Ex.P.11 in the presence of panchas, the said rod is
marked as M.O. 15, MO. 15(a) and Ex.P.11(c) are his signatures.
He further depose that he has subjected the seized articles to PF
and then recorded the statements of CW. 2 to 11,14 and his staff
SC No. 1108/2013

P.C.Rajesh and Sudarshan Aski and also recorded the statement
of Smt. Premavathi, Basavaraju, Sudhaprasanna and Gayathri
devi and on the same day sent requisition to PWD Engineer to
draw sketch and on 27.4.2013 received the PM reports and then
sent the iron rod for examination. The PM reports are marked as
Ex.P.47 and 50, his signatures are marked as Ex.P.47(b) and
50(b). He identified Ex.P. 8 to 12 and MO. 8(a), 9(a),10(b), 11(b)
and 12(a). he further depose that on 30.4.2013 A2 was arrested
and produced before him and he arrested him and recorded his
statement and on 17.4.2013 he recorded the statement of A2
wherein he has stated that A1 made phone call to him and told that
he intends to kill Preethy Acharya and Veda and he questioned
him that how he will kill them, he told that Preethy Acharya like to
drink Bear very much and he will made them to drink and when
they were inebriation he will kill her, hence A2 provoked him and
advised him to kill. He further depose that after sometime A1
telephoned to him and has stated that he stabbed his wife with
iron rod and when Veda intervened he also stabbed Veda and
committed murder and further he stated that he is going to escape
and he should not give his phone numbers to others.

72. PW. 29 further depose that he obtained the CDR and on
3.5.2013 received the sketch of the spot marked as Ex.P.30 and
the report annexted to sketch is marked as Ex.P.31. He further
depose that on 10.5.2013 he send the seized articles to FSL by
issuing the passport-Ex.P.37 and PW. 19 produced the
acknowledgement and the report as per Ex.P.38 and on
14.6.2013 he received the opinion from the doctor regarding
weapon and requisition and the report are marked as Ex.P. 52 and
SC No. 1108/2013

53 and then he received the documents from Little Flower school
and Martin Luther school which are marked as Ex.P. 26 and 33
and the TC of the children is marked as Ex.P.27, the complaint in
Cr. No.206/2012 and 227/2012 are marked as Ex.P. 12 to 17. He
further depose that after completion of investigation filed the
charge sheet against the accused.

73. PW. 30 the Scientific officer of FSL has depose that on
10.5.2013 he received 12 articles in Cr. No. 125/2013 from
Girinagar Police and as per the instructions of his superior he
opened the sealed cover and saw sample blood, 4 pillows, one
track pant, one shirt, one rod, petty coat, nighties, underwear and
on examination found on item No.3 to 9, 11 and 12 human blood
of `A` group and blood stains were not found on item No.10, since
the blood was dry they could not examine item No.1 and 2, he
further depose that he repacked the articles and he issued his
report as per Ex.P. 61 and Ex.P.61(a) is his signature, Ex.P. 62 is
the sample seal, Ex.P.62(a) is his signature, he identified MO. 1 to
4 and 8 to 15 and his signatures at MO.1(b) to 4(b) and 8(b) to
15(b).

IV] Classification of witnesses;

Now the witnesses can be classified as below.

74. PW.1 Mother of deceased Preethy Acharya and relative
of deceased Vedha examined to prove the strain relationship
between accused no.1 and Preethy Acharya and motive of A1 to
murder Preethy Acharya and Veda.

75. PW. 3, 4, 5, 6, 8,9, 10 are neighbors examined to prove
the strain relationship between A1 and Preethy Acharya. To
SC No. 1108/2013

establish the incident on the said day. PW.3 examined for
establishing the circumstance of A1 being last seen. PW.2 and 7
are witnesses to spot mahazer and also examined for establishing
the recovery of Iron Rod-MO.15 as per mahazer-Ex.P2 and P.11
and PW.11 and 16 are the Principals of Martin Luthar School
where 2 children of Preethy Acharya were studying and Principal
of Little Flower School where Preethy Acharya was working and
are examined to establish that Preethy Acharya was working to
maintain her family and to establish that she took T.C. of 2 children
to go back to Bombay due to harassment of accused no.1. PW.17
the Bar cashier is examined to establish that accused no.1 with
due preparation bought drinks to deceased. PW.26 and 30 the
doctors are examined to prove the cause of death of deceased.
PW.27 Tahasildhar who conducted the mahazer on the dead body
of Preethy Acharya and Vedha. The prosecution has examined
some witnesses who depose regarding procedure followed during
investigation.

V] Re: UNDISPUTED FACTS;

76. There are many facts depose and narrated by the
witnesses related to the accused no.1 and deceased Preethy
Acharya and some facts related to deceased Vedha. Before
appreciating the evidence, pointing at the circumstance to be
proved by the prosecution, it is necessary to find out undisputed
facts to appreciate disputed facts. The undisputed facts are;
accused no.1 and deceased Preethy Acharya were husband and
wife. accused no.1 had two marriages earlier to marriage with
Preethy Acharya, both end up in divorce. Deceased Preethy
Acharya also had got divorce from 1st husband. Preethy Acharya
SC No. 1108/2013

had two children from her 1st husband. It is not in dispute that after
marriage Preethy Acharya started to reside in the house of
accused No.1 at Bengaluru. It is also not in dispute that deceased
Preethy Acharya lodged complaint against accused no.1 and same
were registered in crime no.206/2012 on 14.08.2012 for the
offence punishable u/.sec 498A, 506 of
IPC
. Same was registered
as CC No.21188/2012. She has lodged another complaint against
accused no.1 which was registered in Cr. No.227/2012 FIR dated
12.09.2012 for the offence u/sec 504, 506 of
IPC
and same was
registered as CC No.22335/2012. It is also not in dispute that
deceased Preethy Acharya working as Teacher in Little Flower
School. It is also not in dispute that PW.2 to 6, 8 to 10 are the
neighbors of accused no.1. These are the undisputed facts of the
case.

VI] Re: Regarding strain relationship between accused no.1
and Preethy Acharya and harassment accused No.1;

77. Now coming to the strain relationship between accused
no.1 and Preethy Acharya. As per prosecution this is the main
cause to commit crime by accused no.1. It is the case of the
prosecution that, accused no.1 alongwith accused no.2 hatched
plan, conspired to murder victim Preethy Acharya, as she lodged
complaint against him and sent him to jail and also she is not
giving divorce and she may ask for share in his property. Accused
no.2 abetted accused no.1 to eliminate deceased Preethy
Acharya. That accused no.1 brought drinks to both Preethy
Acharya and Vedha and made them to drink and when they were
inebriation, accused no.1 assaulted 6-7 times on the head of his
wife Preethy Acharya with Iron Rod and caused bleeding injuries.
SC No. 1108/2013

When Veda came to rescue, accused no.1 also assaulted 6-7
times on the head of Vedha, with same iron rod and murdered both.

78. This being the case of the prosecution, in order to prove
the guilt of accused no.1 and 2 examined witnesses. As per
prosecution, accused no.1 developed enmity against Preethy
Acharya as she lodged complaint against him in Girinagar P.S. and
police arrested him and sent to custody. To take revenge he
hatched plan to eliminate Preethy Acharya. In commission of
murder of Preethy Acharya, Veda also got killed. The reason for
revenge and enmity is because of the strain relationship between
accused no.1 and deceased Preethy Acharya. After marriage
accused no.1 started to harass Preethy Acharya and it is alleged
that accused no.1 was not doing any work, he has no earning and
he addicted to bad habits. He use to drink and harass Preethy
Acharya physically and mentally. Further he forced her to go to
work and give all money to him. In order to maintain family Preethy
Acharya forced to take up job and she was working as Teacher in
Little Flower school. The harassment by accused no.1 is on daily
basis. He use to harass Preethy Acharya daily for one or the other
reasons.

79. In order to prove the strain relationship between accused
no.1 and Preethy Acharya, PW.1 the mother of Preethy Acharya
depose that, after marriage accused no.1, Preethy Acharya and
her children born to her 1st husband, started matrimonial life in
Bangalore. She depose that, as per say of her daughter Preethy
Acharya for 2-3 months every thing is fine. Then there was rift and
disturbance between accused no.1 and Preethy Acharya regarding
job by Preethy Acharya and accused no.1 forced her to go outside
SC No. 1108/2013

and work. He use to drink all the time alongwith his friends. He
forced Preethy Acharya to look after his friends and she should
enjoy with them. To which Preethy Acharya refused. The said
disturbance continued for 2 years. She joined Little flower school
as teacher and she look after entire family and manage the same.
She depose that Preethy Acharya while going to school, use to call
her and tell her about the harassment by accused no.1. She
depose that he physically harass her and even he try to assault
her with knife. She depose that when she came to meet her
daughter from Thana, Mumbai, at that time she advised both, but
there was no improvement in the behavior of accused no.1. She
depose that since the accused no.1 harass her daily, she advised
her to protect herself and lodge complaint and take protection from
police. She depose that, for same matter Preethy Acharya lodged
complaint against accused no.1 in Girinagar P.S. She lodged
complaint because, one women by name Valli use to come to their
house in her absence and accused no.1 had illicit relationship with
her and he use to give all articles from house to her. When Preethy
Acharya asked same, he assaulted her and Preethy Acharya for
that reason lodged complaint before police. Police arrested
accused no.1 on the basis of complaint. He got released from jail
and when he returned from jail, he started to harass Preethy
Acharya in different manner. accused no.1 started harass saying
as, she sent him to jail and for that, he will kill her and threatened
her with dire consequences. Since same is continued, she again
lodged complaint against accused no.1 before Girinagar P.S. On
the basis of complaint, police again arrested him and sent him to
custody. He got released on bail and
SC No. 1108/2013

after returning from jail he started harassing her and Preethy
Acharya use to tell all to PW.1 through phone.

80. PW.1 specifically speaks that, there is disturbance
between accused no.1 and Preethy Acharya. accused no.1 use to
harass her almost on daily basis. It is relevant to observe the
cross-examination of PW. 1. If the cross-examination of PW. 1 is
appreciated there is no specific refusal regarding harassment by
accused No.1 to Preethy Acharya. It is only suggested that
Preethy on her own will forcing accused No.1, that she will go for
work and she is doing job. Accused No.1 never forced her to do
the job. The said suggestion denied by PW. 1. It is also suggested
that PW. 1 depose falsely that, when PW.1 visited house of
accused No.1, accused No.1 try to assault Preethy with knife . This
suggestion also denied by PW. 1. Further it is suggested that, the
cases filed by Preethy Acharya against accused No.1 regarding
domestic violence and criminal intimidation ends up in acquittal. To
the said suggestion PW.1 pleads ignorance. Apart from these
suggestions, there is no specific cross-examination by accused
No.1 regarding allegation of harassment to Preethy Achary. This
fact is very relevant because, the said fact is the genesis of the
present crime. The fact regarding there was disturbance in the
relationship between accused no.1 and Preethy Acharya is also
depose by other witnesses. The witnesses depose that, there was
quarrel between both husband and wife. The said fact is depose
by PW.3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9 and 10, these witnesses are neighbors of
accused no.1 house. Though A1 and his counsel cross examined
PW.1 but nothing material is elicited which discredit the deposition.

81. PW.3 depose regarding strained relationship between
SC No. 1108/2013

accused No.1 and Preethy Acharya and harassment by accused
No.1 to Preethy Acharya. PW. 3 is the resident of building, where
accused No.1 and Preethay Acharya resides. In his evidence PW.
3 depose that he is residing in the 2nd floor in DMC building No.
1113/N. Accused No.1 resides in the ground floor of the said
building. He depose that deceased Preethy Acharya was wife of
accused No.1. 3 years back from date of incident, A1 married to
Preethy Acharya. He depose that after marriage for some time
everything was good, but for some reasons there started
dissension between A1 and deceased Preethy Acharya. He
depose that he heard when in his presence, deceased Preethy
Acharya said to his wife that, there is a financial problem and it is
difficult to manage house. After sometime the quarrel aggravated
between A1 and Preethy Acharya and the sound of quarrel
reaches his house. Preethy Acharya lodged complaint in Girinagar
PS against A1, on the said complaint, on the basis of charge of
harassment, A1 sent to Judicial Custody. After coming from jail
again A1 started quarrel with deceased Preethy Acharya. Preethy
Acharya again for second time lodged complaint in Girinagar P.S.
against A1. He depose that, he console her, when she told him
that there is a harassment by her husband and threatening of
murder. The said fact regarding quarrel and harassment is known
to all in the building. He came to know that Preethy Acharya told
his wife that A1 use to drink and for that there is a quarrel between
them. In the month of April 2013 when Preethy Acharya going to
Mangalore for ugadi festival he heard when Preethy Acharya
telling his wife that she cannot bear harassment of her husband.

82. He is subjected to cross-examination by A1. It is
SC No. 1108/2013

suggested that due to his busy schedule he does not know what is
going on in the house of A1. To which he answered that at least 2-
3 times in a week when he was in the house in the evening he
heard the quarrel. It is suggested that when going to work or
returning he never asked about her problem. To which he
answered, she herself use to tell him. He further depose that he
was a witness to both the complaints lodged by Preethy Acharya
against A1. He depose that he has not seen quarrel but he heard
them. He know personally regarding 2nd complaint lodged by
Preethy Acharya in Police Station. He depose that since the
quarrel get aggravated she lodged 2 nd complaint. The PW. 3 has
supported the case of the prosecution in respect of strain
relationship between A1 and Preethy Acharya.

83. In this line the other witnesses i.e. PW. 4 depose
regarding relationship between A1 and Preethy Acharya. PW. 4
depose that she is the resident of 2nd floor in the building where A1
and Preethy Acharya resides. She depose that she know A1 and
they reside in the ground floor. She depose that A1`s wife
introduced herself as a wife of A1. The said Preethy Acharya told
her that A1 harassing her and at that time PW. 4 told to Preethy
Acharya that she is not interested in others affairs. She further
depose that A1 does not provide her food and forced her to go out
to do job. Preethy Acharya told these aspects after 6-7 months
after she came to said house. She depose that she did not see
that there is a disturbance in the family of Preethy Acharya, but
she heard the quarrel. Deceased Preethy Acharya before lodging
complaint against A1 sought her help. She wants to lodge
complaint against A1 because of harassment. Treating her partly
SC No. 1108/2013

hostile, prosecution cross examined her. During the cross-
examination by prosecution she depose that Preethy Acharya told
her, A1 after 3 months of marriage started harassment, forcing her
to go out and do job, look after family and gave all the earnings to
him. The said suggestion was admitted by PW. 4. Further Preethy
Acharya told that A1 is not looking after her and her children. PW.
4 depose that when Preethy Acharya shared her problem she
consoled her. She depose that she came to know of lodging
complaint by Preethy Acharya against A1 and she heard the
quarrel between A1 and Preethy Acharya.

84. This witness is also subjected to cross-examination by
A1. During cross-examination she depose that she did not seen
quarrel between A1 and Preethy Acharya but heard the same.
She did not gave statement in 2 cases lodged by Preethy
Acharya. During cross-examination she depose that Preethy
Acharya told her regarding A1 use to suspect her and she was not
given food and forced her to work outside. She is looking after her
family and managing the affairs of the house. During the cross-
examination of PW. 4 A1 try to elicit that only because of the
reason food is not provided or gas cylinder is not provided, for
these two issues Preethy Acharya could not have filed complaint.
To this suggestion PW 4 depose that she does not know the
reason for loding complaint. But she know that Preethy Acharya
has lodged complaint against A1. PW. 4 denied suggestion that
Preethy Acharya`s first husband filed restitution of conjugal rights
case and he wanted one child from Preethy Acharya. Further she
denied that many people from Bangalore, Mangalore and Bombay
use to come to meet Preethy Acharya when A1 was not there in
SC No. 1108/2013

the house. She further denied that Preethy Acharya told her that
when A1 not present in the house there is a lot of quarrel between
Preethy Acharya and the persons came from outside.

85. PW. 5 depose that he is the husband of PW. 4 (CW.8).
He depose that he know A1, but does not know A2. A1 resides in
the ground floor. He depose that for about 3-4 years back A1
married to Preethy Acharya. He depose that one-two times
Preethy Acharya told him that A1 use to harass her, at that time he
told her don`t tell any problems to him. 7 months after her
marriage she told regarding harassment. He depose that some
days he heard screaming of Preethy Acharya in a quarrel with A1
from her house in the night at 10.30-11.00. He heard such a
screaming 2-3 times. He does not know how A1 married. He
depose that after lodging of complaint there is quarrel between
them. He heard quarrel whenever he returned home in the night.

86. PW. 5 is also subjected to cross-examination by PW.1.
He admitted the suggestion that one or two times Preethy
Acharya had conversation with him, and that too for 1 or 2
minutes. A suggestion put to PW. 5 that Preethy Acharya did not
told him regarding financial condition of their house. To which he
answered that she herself told regarding the said condition. He
questioned whether he saw quarrel between A1 and Preethy
Acharya, to which he answered that in the night 10.00-11.00 p.m
he heard quarrel. He admitted that she did not told about exact
problem between A1 and herself. He also depose that he heard
about two cases filed by Preethy Acharya.

87. P.W. 8 depose that she know both Preethy Acharya and
SC No. 1108/2013

Veda. They live in front of her house. They were friends from one
and half years. She depose that though Preethy Acharya did not
said about family affair but she know that there was a disturbance
in the house of Preethy Acharya. That Preethy Acharya told her
that there is nothing good between her and A1. she depose that
Preethy Acharya told regarding her relationship with A1 and there
is always quarrel between them. Preethy Acharya told her about
loding of complaint against A1, she depose that when Preethy
Acharyaand Veda returned from Mangalore, she visited PW. 8`s
house. At that time PW. 8`s husband asked what is the problem,
Preethy Acharya told that she had no good relationship with her
husband and it is not possible to live with him. She is subjected to
cross-examination, but nothing material is elicited.

88. PW. 9 depose that deceased Preethy Acharya resides
in front of his house, she known to his wife, A1 is the husband of
Preethy Acharya and he depose that Preethy Acharya told him
that she came from Bombay, but her matrimonial life is not good
and she is returning to Bombay. He has not asked her problem in
detail. He is subjected to cross-examination,but nothing much
elicited from PW. 9.

89. PW. 16 the Principal of Little Flower school where said
deceased Preethy Acharya working as teacher, she depose that
deceased Preethy Acharya working as English teacher from 2011
to 2013, she was a good teacher and she was scared in life. There
is trouble in the family, whenever she requests for leave, she use
to tell that her husband is not co-operating. She depose that
Preethy Acharya use to tell that there was financial downside. It is
difficult to maintain life and education of children. She did not use
SC No. 1108/2013

to bring meals from home, but shared other teacher`s food.
Preethy Acharya said her husband has an affair with other woman.
She depose that on, 10.4.2013 Preethy Acharya gave resignation
and when asked for reason, she told that she had life threat. She
had nobody in Bangalore. She had no other option and she is
going to Bombay. PW. 16 is subjected to cross-examination but
nothing material elicited by A1 in this regard.

90. PW. 21 relative of deceased Preethy Acharya and Veda
depose in this regard that Preethy Acharya told that she is
suffering physical and mental harassment by her husband and in
that regard she lodged complaint twice before Girinagar Police.
He is subjected to cross-examination by A1. During cross-
examination he depose that he has not seen quarrel between A1
and Preethy Acharya directly. He depose that once Preethy
Acharya and A1 came to marriage at Mangalore. At that time he
came to know that the relationship between A1 and Preethy
Acharya is not cordial. In his house when they were in front of
him he came to know that there is disturbance between A1 and
Preethy Acharya.

91. These witnesses specifically depose regarding strain
relationship between deceased Preethy Acharya and A1. Some of
the witnesses heard the quarrel between them. Further before
some of the witnesses said deceased Preethy Acharya shared her
pain regarding harassment by A1. All the witnesses spoke
regarding the disturbance in the family between A1 and Preethy
Acharya. Deceased Preethy Acharya told them that A1 forcing her
to do job and maintain family. That some witnesses specifically
spoke that they heard screaming while quarrel between A1 and
SC No. 1108/2013

Preethy Acharya in the night. These witnesses are the direct
witnesses to this fact because they witness through their sense
that there is disturbance in the family and A1 use to harass her, as
said by deceased the relationship between them is not cordial.

92. On appreciation of evidence of these witnesses it can be
inferred that due to harassment and strain relationship with A1
Preethy Acharya lodged 2 complaints against A1. This fact is
corroborated by the documentary evidence as the prosecution
produced Ex.P.12 complaint in Cr. No. 206/2012 for the offence
u/sec. 498, 506 of
IPC
. Ex.P. 13 complaint in Cr. No. 227/2012 for
the offence u/sec. 504, 506 of
IPC
. Ex.P.12(A) and Ex.P.13(A) are
the original copy of complaint. Ex.P.14 is the FIR in Cr. No.
206/2012 u/sec. 498A, 506 of
IPC
, Ex.P.15 is the FIR in Cr. No.
227/2012 for the offence u/sec. 504, 506 of
IPC
. Ex.P.16 is the
charge sheet in CC No. 21187/2012 (Cr. No. 206/12 u/sec. 498A
506 of
IPC
). Ex.P.17 is the Charge sheet in CC No. 22335/2012
(Cr. No. 227/2012 u/sec. 504, 506 of
IPC
). These documentary
evidence reveals that deceased lodged complaints against A1
for domestic harassment. In Ex.P.12, 12 (A), Ex.P.13, 13(A)
deceased Preethy Acharya narrated both physical and mental
harassment by A1. However it is the defense of the A1 that in both
the cases A1 got acquittal. But the fact through ocular evidence
and documentary evidence, it is clear that there is disturbance in
the relationship between A1 and Preethy Acharya. The accused
No.1 though in his defense try to elicit that there was no
disturbance in the family, but the ocular evidence of the witnesses
and documents speaks otherwise. PW. 1 mother of deceased
stated that her daughter told her regading harassment and strain
SC No. 1108/2013

relationship between husband and wife. Further PW. 3, 4,5,
depose that said PreethyAcharya use to share her problem and
told them that A1 use to harass her and because of that she
lodged complaint against A1. Further after lodging first complaint
A1 was sent to jail and after returning from jail, he started more
harassment in revenge that she sent him jail and he use to
threaten with dire consequences. After that again she lodged 2 nd
complaint. This fact of lodging complaint and sending him to jail
developed enmity between A1 and Preethy Acharya. Further PW.
21 depose who is relative of deceased Preethy Acharya that he
has witnessed that there was no cordial relationship between A1
and Preethy Acharya. On appreciation of evidence of these
witnesses in respect of strain relationship between A1 and Preethy
Acharya and harassment by A1 to Preethy Acharya they spoke
consistently. The testimony of these witnesses is corroborative to
each other. However the affairs are private between husband and
wife the witnesses may not directly present at the time of quarrel
between husband and wife, but there is sufficient material that
they have witnessed the quarrel may be by hearing but the fact
regarding relationship is clear from these witnesses. There may
be minor discrepancy, the main fact regarding relationship and
harassment is consistent. There is no reason to disbelieve the
testimony of these witnesses. By this it can be held that the
prosecution is able to prove the circumstance regarding strain
relationship between A1 and Preety Acharya and harassment by
A1 to her.

VII] Fateful day;

93. It is the case of the prosecution that on 10.4.2013 PW. 1
SC No. 1108/2013

took Preethy and her two children and Veda to Mangalore on the
eve of Ugadi. After ugadi festival on 15.4.2013 PW. 1 and her
husband and two children of deceased went to Bombay. Deceased
Preethy Acharya has to collect the school certificate of her children
and collect luggage. On 16.4.2013 she came down to Bangalore.
PW. 1 insisted as it is not safe to go alone to Bangalore, Veda and
her child accompanied deceased Preethy Acharya to Bangalore.
On 16.4.2013 Preethy Acharya and Veda and her child reached
Bangalore in the morning , A1 who was present in the home did
not opened door. After some time A1 went outside from the house.
At that time Preethy Acharya entered house. A1 returned home
and quarreled with them. On 17/18.4.2013 in the mid night at
about 1.00-2.00 there is sound of screaming of woman and child
from Preethy Achaya`s house. Next day on 18.4.2013 morning
mother of PW. 1 reached Bengaluru from Bombay and found
Preethy Acharya and Veda are murdered and they were lying in
the pool of blood. It is the case of the prosecution that on
17/18.4.2013 A1 made Preethy Acharya and Veda to drink beer
and when they were in intoxication at midnight between 1.00-2.00
A1 assaulted Preethy Acharya and Veda with iron rod and
murdered them.

i] accused present on the day of incident and assaulted
deceased Preethy Acharya and Veda.

94. The prosecution has to prove circumstance that A1
present on fateful day in the house when crime committed. To
prove this fact the prosecution examined PW. 3,4,5,8, 9, 10 who
are neighbor of A1 and Preethy Acharya. These witness are the
residents of same building where deceased Preethy Acharya and
SC No. 1108/2013

A1 resided. These witnesses have depose regarding strain
relationship between A1 and Preethy Achaya and harassment by
A1 to her. To explain fact regarding day before the incident,
incident day and days after incident PW. 3,4,5,8,9,10 gave their
evidence.

95. Before adverting into the appreciation of oral evidence it
is necessary to observe the structure of building and crime spot.
As per record and evidence it is clear that the building where
offence is committed is consist of ground, first and 2nd floor. The
said A1 and Preethy Acharya resides in ground floor and
remaining witnesses I.e PW. 3,4,5,6 resides in 1st and 2nd floor.
PW. 3 resides in 2nd floor. PW. 4 and 5 are husband and wife
resides in 2nd floor in front of PW. 3`s house. PW. 6 resides in first
floor. PW 8 and 9 resides in front of A1 house. PW. 10 resides in
adjacent building. It is clear from the evidence that stair case to
first floor and 2nd floor starts in front of A1`s house at ground
floor. Residents of 1st and 2nd floor use said stair case to reach their
houses. This fact is necessary to establish fact regarding crime
spot. The said crime spot is bed room in the A1`s house in ground
floor.

96. Now it has to be examined whether A1 present on the
day of incident. PW.1,3and 4 depose in this regard. PW. 1 depose
that on 17.4.2013 she started travel to Bangalore. In the night at
10.30 p.m she was talking to her daughter Preethy and she told
her that A1 threatening her with life threat and to Veda too he was
giving life threat. However she is cross examined on this point
putting defense that A1 was not there on the day of incident. The
said suggestion denied by PW.1 stating that on the day of incident
SC No. 1108/2013

when daughter called her and at that time he was in the house.
Further in this regard P.W 3 depose that Preethy Acharya came to
Bangalore from Mangalore alongwith Veda ad her child on
17.4.2013 in the morning and A1 did not opened door to them.
Then they went to Babita`s house. In the morning when the said
PW. 3 going to work Preethy and Veda and her child standing
outside house. At that time he asked them and they replied that
they came from Mangalore and A1 is not opening door, at that
time A1 was inside the house. On the same day in the evening
when he returned at 8.30 Preethey Acharya, Veda and her child
sitting inside house and when he going to his floor he inquired
Preethy and she said they came from back door. He further
depose that in the same evening again quarrel started and he
heard same when he was in the house. PW. 3 during cross-
examination depose that he has not seen Preethy Acharya, Veda
and her child coming from Mangalore, but he saw them standing in
front of house. He further depose that he has not seen A1 was not
opening door. He depose that the said fact told by Preethy
Acharya and he was suggested by A1 during cross-examination
that he has not asked Preethy when he was going office. He
depose that after returning in the evening he asked Preethy, as
they were outside in the morning and in evening they were inside
the house.

96(a) PW. 5 depose that he saw A1 one or two days prior to
the date of incident, Preethy alongwith another woman and A1,
were there in the house. During cross-examination by prosecution
he admitted that on 16.4.2013 in the morning Preethy and Veda
and child returned to home, at that time A1 did not opened door
SC No. 1108/2013

and after some time A1 went outside and at that time Preethy and
Veda entered house. After returning to home A1 started quarrel
with them and in this regard he gave statement to police. To the
said suggestion PW. 5 depose that he know regarding entering of
house by Preethy and Veda and child and quarrel by A1. During
cross-examination by A1 he depose that he saw Preethy, Veda
and child coming from Mangalore to house. He also saw them at
8.30 - 9.00 in the night. He further depose that he saw them when
they were in the house. He came to know that A1 did not open the
door to them when they came to house. he came to know that A1
after returning home had quarrel with them. But he has not seen
the same. He came to know said fact from CW. 5,6,7 and 8.

97. PW. 8 depose that Preethy Acharya and Veda and child
came from Mangalore to Bangalore. On the said day when she
was sweeping said Preethy Acharya and Veda and child standing
outside their house. She asked Preethy why she came back from
Mangalore, Preethy told she had some work in Bangalore and she
had to collect some luggage. PW. 8 depose that since A1 did not
open door they were standing outside. Then PW. 8 asked them for
help, at that time Preethy Acharya replied police are coming and
they will help. She depose that Preethy and Veda went to her
house to get fresh and then they had breakfast. Then they went to
Police Station. On next day Veda told her that, they broke open the
lock and went inside. After 2 days heard that Preethy and Veda are
murdered.

98. On appreciation of the testimony of PW. 1,3,5 and 8 it
can be inferred that A1 was there in the house when Preethy and
Veda and child returned from Mangalore. PW. 1 depose that on
SC No. 1108/2013

the day of incident her daughter speaking to her and she told that,
A1 threatening her. However the defense put up that no call detail
records were collected during investigation regarding call between
PW. 1 and Preethy Acharya. But during cross-examination also
she specifically stated that her daughter called her and at that time
A1 was inside house. PW. 3 depose that on day before incident A1
was inside the house and A1 did not open door when Preethy and
Veda and child came from Mangalor. He depose that he heard
quarrel in the evening. PW. 5 also depose in the same line that
day before incident A1 was inside the house alongwith Preethy
and Veda and child. This piece of evidence clearly establish that
A1 was there in the house on the day before incident and on the
day of incident. Though A1 in his defense disputed, the entering of
Preethy and Veda from back door contending that, there is no
back door to their house and the same is tried to be elicited from
the evidence of PW. 12 who prepared sketch of spot at the request
of IO. But here it is relevant to observe that, said fact of entering
into house through back door by Preethy and Veda does not have
significance in the case, as because it is not in dispute that they
entered into house and they were in the house on the day of
incident. Further their bodies were found inside the house. Hence
the said fact of entering into the house though back door has no
baring on the case.

ii] Plea of Alibi

99. The fact regarding presence of A1 in the house on the
day before the incident and on the day of incident assumes
significance and importance in this case, as because A1 has
raised plea of alibi. During the course of cross-examination of
SC No. 1108/2013

PW.1 and PW.29 he puts up the defence that, he was not in the
house. A2 was suffering from ill health for treatment he was in the
house of A2 and further he did not have information regarding
coming of both deceased to his house. However same defence put
up by A1 in written submission submitted by him, in his defence
after recording of statement u/sec 313 of
Cr.PC
. He submitted that
on 16, 17 and 18 of April 2013 he was not present at place of
occurrence, he was at the residence of A2 Prabhakar since A2
was not feeling well. On 18.04.2013 police came to A2's house
and arrested both. This is the version of defense of A1 that he was
not present on 16, 17, 18th of April 2013 which lead rising plea of
alibi.

100. At this stage it is worth to rely on the ratio laid down by
the Hon`ble Apex Court in
Dhudh Nath Pandeay vs. State of
U.P. The
Hon`ble Court observes in respect of plea of alibi.

" The plea of alibi postulates the physical impossibility
of the presence of the accused at the scene of offence by
reason of his presence at other place. The plea can
therefore succeed only if it is shown that the accused was so
far away at the relevant time that he could not be present at
the place where the crime was committed........"

101. In another case of Dhananjaya Chatarjee vs. State of
West Bengal it is also observed that;

"Though it is not necessary for an accused to render
an explanation to prove his innocence and even if he
renders a false explanation, it cannot be use to support the
prosecution case against him and that the entire case must
be proved by the prosecution itself but it is well settled that
a plea of alibi, if raised by an accused is required to be
proved by him by cogent and satisfactory evidence so as to
SC No. 1108/2013

completely exclude the possibility of the presence of the
accused at the place of occurrence at the relevant time. The
belated and vague plea of alibi of which we find no whisper
during the cross-examination of any of the prosecution
witnesses and which has not been sought to be established
by leading any evidence is only an afterthought and a plea
of despair. The abscondence of the appellant is thus a
material circumstance which has been satisfactorily and
conclusively established by the prosecution against the
appellant."

As per the observation of the Hon`ble Apex Court it is the duty of
the accused to prove the plea of alibi to the satisfaction of the
court and substantiate the plea and to make it reasonably
probable. It is only a rule of evidence recognized u/sec. 11 of

Evidence Act
that, facts which are inconsistent with the facts in
issue are relevant. The burden of proving commission of offence
by accused, so as to fasten the liability of guilt on him, remains on
the prosecution. The plea of alibi taken by the accused needs to
be considered only when the burden, which lies on the prosecution
is discharged satisfactorily. But once the prosecution succeeds in
discharging its burden, then it is incumbent upon the accused
taking the plea of alibi to prove it with certainty so as to exclude
the possibility of his presence at the relevant place and time.

102.
In
Jibon C.H. Bharli vs. State of Assam
1987 (3)
Crime 883 observed that;

"A plea of alibi when taken by the accused must be
conclusively proved by him and in case of failure of proving
the plea or adducing unreasonable evidence on the plea the
prosecution case and its substantive evidence implicating
accused get further strengthened."
SC No. 1108/2013

If the said principles are applied when accused puts of plea of alibi
it is burden on the accused to prove the same and he has to show
that he was not present at crime scene. He was far way from
material place and that even he cannot reach said spot at
reasonable time.

103. However the burden of proving guilt of the accused was
not shifted on the accused, it remains on the prosecution itself. But
if the plea of alibi was raised by the accused he has to establish
certain facts, may be circumstantial one, which is inconsistent with
the case of the prosecution that he was present at the crime spot
at the relevant time. It is sufficient to place certain facts with
plausible explanation which creates certain amount of doubt
regarding the presence of the accused at relevant time and place.
Hence in this case he has not given reasonable explanation which
made to believe by this court that, he was not present on the day
before incident and on the day of incident and he was in the
residence of A2. The said residence is far away from material
place which cannot be reached at reasonable time. However
testimony of PW.1, 3, 5 and 8 speaks otherwise. They have
categorically stated that on day before incident, A1 was in the
house and they heard quarrel between A1 and Preethy Acharya
and they have specifically speaks that, Prethi, Veda and child
came from Mangalore on 16.04.2013 and they were standing
outside the house as A1 did not open the door. Further on the said
evening PW.3, 5 heard the quarrel between A1 and Preethy
Acharya. PW.1 categorically stated, her daughter said her that A1
is in the house and is threatening them. Further PW. 3 stated that
he saw A1 going out at night on the day of incident. The evidence
SC No. 1108/2013

of PW.8 corroborate the evidence of PW.3 and 5. As stated earlier
also there is no reason to disbelieve the testimony of the
witnesses.

104. Further it is necessary to observe that as per
prosecution A1 is arrested from Kengeri Satellite bus stand, PW.
14 Sub Inspector K.Subramani who arrested accused No.1 and
produced before P.I., depose that, on 18.4.2013 P.I. assign them to
search and arrest A1 of this case. On information when they
reached Kengeri Satellite bus stand a person sitting suspiciously,
when asked information accused No.1 said his details and they
arrested him and produced before P.I. He is cross examined by
the defense. But not elicited any material that they have not
arrested him from said bus stand. On perusal of the evidence not
even a suggestion put up regarding his arrest from house of A2. In
the written submission submitted by A1 he stated he was arrested
from accused No.2. But defense not even cross examined PW. 14
or PW. 29 in that regard that he was not arrested from the said bus
stand but from the house of accused No.2. As stated above not a
single suggestion put up both to PW. 14 and PW. 29. On
appreciation of evidence of PW.1, 3, 5, 8 it is clear that the A1 was
present on the day before incident and on the day of incident.
Further it is relevant to observe that though the plea of alibi was
raised but said alibi is not established by A1.

105. Even A2 was present before the court during the
recording of statement u/sec. 313 of
Cr.P.C
. But he has not
whispered about the presence of A1 in his house. It is necessary
to observe that if the testimony of prosecution witnesses indicates
towards the presence of accused No.1 in his house in crime spot
SC No. 1108/2013

at the relevant point of time as stated by PW. 1, 3,10, It is
incumbent upon the accused No.1 to explain to give probable
explanation that he was in the house of A2. He in his defense
vaguely stated that he was in the house of A2 before the incident
and on the date of incident. But apart from the statement there is
no circumstantial facts or material placed to establish that he was
in the house of A2. As observed by the Hon`ble Apex Court the
plea of alibi must be proved with certainty. But here in this case,
the accused No.1 apart from his statements placed nothing on
record to substantiate his defense in this regard. Hence the plea of
alibi cannot be accepted.

iii] Commission of Offence;

106. As per the case of the prosecution A1 conspiring with
A2 planned to kill Preethi Acharya. He made to drink both Preethi
and Veda beer which he brought from PW. 17`s shop. When the
said Preethi and Veda are drunk and in intoxication, A1 with an
iron rod which he kept in house assaulted Prethi on her head for
about 6-7 times and caused bleeding injuries. At that time when
Veda came to rescue Preethi, A1 also assaulted 6-7 times on the
head of Veda and cause bleeding injuries and murdered Preethi
and Veda. The case based on circumstantial evidence, as the
offence committed in closed room of the house. The prosecution in
order to prove the commission of offence or murder by assaulting
on the head of deceased has examined PW. 3,4,5,6,8,9 and 10,
amongst them 3 witnesses are very vital. Mainly PW.1, 3 and 10.
however the other witnesses have partly turned hostile. But PW.
3,5,8,9,10 supported in respect of A1 being present in the spot on
the day before incident and on the day of incident.
SC No. 1108/2013

107. It is relevant to appreciate the evidence of PW. 1. She
has stated that on the day of incident there was tense situation in
the house of Preethy Acharya. She stated that her daughter i.e.
deceased Preethy Acharya called her in the night at 10.30 and
said Preethy Acharya expressed fear and life threat. She informed
her that A1 given life threat to Veda also.A1 threatened them with
dire consequences. At that time PW. 1 console her to go inside the
room and lock the door and when she arrive in the morning open
the door. The defense disputed regarding the conversation
between Preethy Acharya and PW. 1. Defense try to elicit that
there is no call records collected during investigation. Further it
has also disputed that said PW. 1 has not travelled from Bombay.
She was very much present in the house. The I.O has not
collected the details regarding travel and collected call details. But
the witness PW. 3, 4,5 depose that PW. 1 came from Bombay and
she was present in the next morning of incident day. Facts stated
by PW. 1 regarding fear of threat to life by Preethy is supported by
the earlier acts of A1. Preethy Acharya has expressed that A1
harassed her physically and mentally and the said harassment and
torture is aggravated when she lodged complaints against A1 and
when he returned from jail the dispute and quarrel between A1 and
Preethy Acharya much aggravated. This fact is very much
supported by the evidence of witnesses. Hence the fear of Preethy
Acharya had on the day of incident as stated by PW. 1 cannot be
discarded.

108. The very crucial evidence is of the evidence of PW. 3.
He in his evidence depose that he saw Preethy Acharya, Veda
and child inside the house in the evening when he returned home
SC No. 1108/2013

from his work. On the said day in the night there is quarrel
between Preethy Acharya and A1. It is very much necessary to
observe that the said fact of quarrel between A1 and Preethy
Acharya as stated by PW. 3 is corroborated with the evidence of
PW. 1. PW. 1 depose that her daughter called her in the night at
10.30 and stated that A1 quarreled with her since morning and
expressed fear of life threat. The fact stated by PW. 3 that there
was quarrel between Preethy Acharya and A1 and fact stated by
PW.1 that her daughter expressed fear conjoins to each other
leading to infer that there was quarrel between Preethy Acharya
and A1. Further A1 gave life threat to Preethy Acharya and Veda.

109. PW. 3 further depose that in the said same night at
midnight a woman and child screaming from house at ground
floor. Immediately he and his wife came out from house and got
down from stairs to messaline floor and he saw A1 going out of
his house. They heard screaming of a woman and child in their
house for about 5 minutes, but when they came down screaming
got stopped. At that time residents of first floor also came out and
they say since they heard screaming sound they came out to see.
But they all thought that, the said quarrel is daily routine. They
returned to their house and slept. He depose that he heard
scream at about 1.30 in the night. On next day at 8.30 in the
morning when he came down mother of Preethy Acharya crying
inside the house. When they went to ask PW. 1 she shouting that
Preethy Acharya and Veda are murdered. They went inside house
and saw dead body of Preethy Acharya and Veda. They were in
pool of blood and 2 pillows and 2-3 beer tins scattered there.
When inquired with mother of Preethy Acharya, she told that
SC No. 1108/2013

Preethy Acharya expressed fear to stay there and Preethy
Acharya told her that, A1 had quarrel in the morning and she had
threat to stay with A1. At that time PW. 1 told her that, she will
come in the morning and till morning do not open the door, but A1
murdered her daughter and Veda.

110. During cross-examination by PP treating him partly
hostile he depose and admitted the suggestion that the building
where they staying had electric light facility and with the help of
that he saw A1 going out of his house. He also admit that after
some time screaming of woman got stopped and only child cry
was heard. To which he further depose that screaming got stopped
once A1 gone out of the house. He also admits that the residents
of the house came out hearing the scream. But they talking that
Chandrashekhar harassing wife and it is not possible to stay
peacefully here, hence they went home and slept.

111. To discredit the evidence of PW. 3, A1 and his counsel
cross examined him, during cross-examination defense try to elicit
that it is not possible to see any person going out of the house of
A1. It is suggested that since the house of PW. 3 is in 2 nd floor and
house of A1 is in ground floor, it is not possible to see who come
and go to A1`s house. The said suggestion is admitted by PW. 3.
He denied the suggestion that he has not seen A1 on the day of
incident at 1.30 a.m. He further depose that at that time he did not
see properly but saw wearing of pant and half shirt. At that time
there is no weapon in the hands of A1. He admitted that he has not
seen A1 assaulting on head of Preethy Acharya and Veda with
iron rod. He further depose that he cannot identify whether the
scream is of life threat or normal scream. He stated that he heard
SC No. 1108/2013

scream around 2-3 minutes. He stated that said screaming sound
came from ground floor to 2nd floor. He stated that he did not gone
to see what happened after hearing scream as because he did not
thought such incident happened and when saw A1 he thought that
it was their family matter and went back to his house.

112. During cross-examination by advocate for A1,
suggestion was put up that in the building there is light facility and
with that help he saw A1 going outside his house. The said
suggestion is admitted by PW. 3 and to that effect he gave
statement to police. The said evidence is corroborated with
evidence of PW. 10 Nethra. She depose that in the month of April
2013 at about 1.00 in the night twice she heard a woman`s
scream but she did not know from which house the said sound
came. And next day morning when she returned from walk she
saw police jeep and motor vehicles standing in front of A1`s house.
Then she heard that there is murder in that house. She further
states that she gave statement to the police that in the night at
1.00 she heard scream of a woman. After that she came to know
that there are 2 murders in the house of A1. She heard that A 1
assaulted both deceased with iron rod and committed murder.
However the A1 during cross-examination has not disputed the
said fact regarding hearing of scream of woman in the night by
PW. 10.

113. The entire testimony of PW. 3 and 10 if appreciated
they speak about the crucial fact that, on the day of incident they
heard scream of woman and child, PW. 3 states that he has seen
A1 going out side the house at 1.30 in the night and when he gone
out the sound of screaming got stopped. It is relevant to appreciate
SC No. 1108/2013

the fact that there is no dispute that the said Preethy Acharya and
Veda were murdered. There is no another theory or contrary to the
said fact. It is amply clear from medical evidence and other
material evidence that the said Preethy Acharya and Veda are
brutally assaulted on their head and causing bleeding injury
murdered them. The question remains who killed them. The
testimony of PW. 1,3,5,8 clearly states that on the day of incident
A1 was present in the house and they heard the quarrel between
Preethy Acharya and A1. As discussed earlier PW.1 and 3 states
that on the day of incident A1 had quarrel with Preethy Acharya
and same is clear from evidence of PW. 3 that he heard the
quarrel. It is clear from evidence that the said Preethy Acharya and
Veda were assaulted with hard object and as stated by
prosecution by iron rod. The medical evidence i.e. PW. 26 depose
that with MO.15 type of weapon the deceased Preethy Acharya
and Veda were assaulted on their head and cause bleeding
injuries and death is due to shock and hammerhage. It can be
inferred that when the deceased were assaulted by an object
MO.1 they might scream out of fear and blow on their head. Only
when assailant assault one woman, the other woman seeing the
same got scared and out of fear shouted or scream. The same
was heard by Pw. 3 and 10. This fact of hearing by PW. 3 cannot
be discarded as because PW. 10`s evidence corroborate the
same. However if the evidence of PW. 10 does not corroborate
same then the scenario would be different. But she depose in the
line of PW. 3.

114. However it is also necessary to observe that PW.
4,5,6,8 who are the neighbors have not heard the said scream
SC No. 1108/2013

and they did not come out. They have turned hostile to the case of
prosecution in this regard. However they have supported case of
prosecution in all other facts. But the question would arise why
would two witnesses lie i.e. PW. 3 and 10. There is no reason for
them to lie as their evidence is natural without taint. However A1
during cross-examination of PW 5 try to establish that PW. 3 had
some difference in respect of payment of maintenance of building,
but the said fact is not sufficient to hold that PW. 3 tell lie in such a
serious circumstance of this case. Even though, why would PW. 10
lie. It can be inferred that the said evidence of PW. 3 and 10 are
natural and their testimony cannot be discarded. It is clear from
their testimony that on the day of incident a woman scream out.

115. Here very pertinent question came to mind that whether
there is any 4th person intervened in the given facts in the night on
the day of incident or another question whether any attempt to
robbery and during that Preethy Acharya and Veda got assaulted
and done to death. If these questions put in given circumstance
the answer would be negative. As because on appreciation of
entire evidence there is no material regarding intervention of any
4th person on the relevant time on the day of incident. Further
there is no articles robbed from the house and there is no material
to that effect in the evidence that the articles are missing from the
house. Then the theory of robbery has to be ruled out. Now the
question, is there any other person present on the day of incident
at relevant time in the night?.

116. The defense mainly A1 puts up theory that said Preethy
Acharya had dispute with many people from Bangalore,
Mangalore and Bombay and they use to visit the house of A1 in his
SC No. 1108/2013

absence. Further another theory put up by A1 that son of Ramdas
use to call Preethy and he intends to marry her and force Preethy
to leave A1 and come to Bombay. The defense put up these to
create doubt in the given circumstance and show that he is not
responsible for the said offence. These theories have no
substance, they are put during cross-examination very vaguely
without substantial concrete defense. The said defense are
random. On one hand it states that, she had dispute with many
people and in another stretch, son of Ramdas forcing her and in
another stretch, it is stated that her first husband had dispute with
her. On appreciation of evidence there is no whisper of
intervention of 4th person even remotely available.

117. Another very strong theory of defense is that, which is
put up during cross-examination of PW.1 and in the written
submission submitted by A1 after recording statement u/sec. 313
of
Cr.PC
. That, PW. 1 mother of Preethy Acharya was present in
the house on day of incident. She has assaulted Preethy Acharya
and Veda and she has murdered them. The reason for the same
explained by A1 in his written submission. He states that CW. 4
Purushotham was forcing the deceased Preethy Acharya to allow
Veda to reside in the house of A1. This fact is seriously objected by
PW. 1. For the reason that the deceased Veda would further
reveal matter of PW.1`s personal matter to A1. But Preethy
Acharya kept Veda with her in the residence of A1, against the
wish of PW.1. This made PW. 1 angry and she use to quarrel with
deceased threatening that she would kill both Preethy Acharya and
Veda. PW. 1 warned A1 to not allow Veda to stay in his residence.
When he told same to Preethy, she did not listen to his words.
SC No. 1108/2013

This made PW. 1 to develop enmity with him also and she warned
him with dire consequences. This is the explanation given by A1 as
defense that PW. 1 is the culprit and she assaulted her daughter
and Veda. The theory of defense is very vague and without
substance. A1 during cross-examination of witnesses mainly PW.
1 has not even putup single suggestion or question to that effect.
The question is, why would PW. 1 kill both. As because as per
evidence Veda came to Bangalore only few days before they
travel to Mangalore. Moreover as per her evidence, PW. 1 herself
has sent Veda with Preethi as safety to Preethi from Mangalore to
Bangalore on 16.4.2013. There is no reason to develop so much
enmity towards Preethy Acharya and Veda so as to kill by brutally
assaulting them. Important fact that in the year 2013 she was aged
62 years. It is not believable that a woman aged 62 years
assaulted deceased with hard object so brutally and kill them. The
theory of defense in this regard in any angle is not acceptable and
believable.

118. Coming back to the theory of presence of 4 th person
on the relevant time at night on the day of incident. Though A1 put
up theory that Preethy Acharya had dispute with her first husband
and disputes with other persons and son of Ramdas had same
intention. But no material on record to see even remotely to
consider the theory. However the line of defense put up is
inconsistent and seems to be vague, to create doubt and
suspicion in the case of prosecution. On the other hand, PW. 3
states that he saw A1 going out of house in the night at 1.30 am
on the day of incident. Though during cross-examination, it is try
to discard his evidence but he stood with his version. Moreover
SC No. 1108/2013

there is no reason to disbelieve his version. Though A1 raised plea
of alibi stating that at relevant time he was not present at incident
spot. He was in the house of A2, but as discussed earlier the
burden is on the A1 to establish the plea of alibi and he has failed
to establish same. The another circumstances to be observed that
A1 was not found on next day of incident on 18.4.2013. all the
witnesses corroborate said fact that they have not seen A1 in the
house. This one important fact is very relevant as to why A1 is
not present in crime spot or is he absconding.

119. If all the circumstance put together the cumulative
effect which leads to infer that on the day of incident in the night
time, A1 was present with Preethy Acharya and Veda and no other
person was present in the house. There was quarrel between A1
and Preethy Acharya and A1 assaulted Preethy Acharya and Veda
on the head with iron rod and cause bleeding injuries and due to
shock and hammerhage they died. Though defense try to put up
theories and try to elicit facts which disputes the version of
prosecution, but the version of PW. 1,3,4,5,8,9,10 are consistent
with regard to harassment by A1 to Preethy. There is consistent
version of PW. 1,3 and 10 that there was quarrel in the house of
A1 and PW3 and 10 heard screaming of Women and child. Further
PW.3 seen A1 going out of his house after hearing screaming of
woman and child. On the cumulative effect of testimony PW1, 3
and 10 the inference can be drawn that they have heard the
quarrel between A1 and Preethy, and they heard the screaming of
women and child. This circumstance leads to infer that there was
no 4th person present on the relevant time except A1. If the
evidence of PW1, 3 and 10 assesed though they have not seen
SC No. 1108/2013

the incident but there evidence to the extent of presence of A1 and
quarrel with Preethy at the spot and on the day of incident is very
much believable.

120. As per
sec.6
of evidence Act when the facts are
relevant when they are farming part of same transaction. Here
though facts narrated by PW1, 3 and 10 are not connected to facts
in issue but form a part of same transaction. Here the facts
narrated by these witnesses in the evidence are relevant facts and
the court has to consider those facts which connects to the facts in
issue. That another aspect is to be appreciated that the defense
tried to put up the theory of deposing false evidence before court
by witnesses. They put up suggestion to the effect, but the same is
completely unacceptable as why would PW3 and 10 and other
witness depose falsely regarding harassment. As they no where
connected to deceased except they are neighbors and they have
no gain from that. The evidence of the witness is natural and
without any extraneous factors.

121. The defense in the present case raised some points as
to disprove the case of the prosecution. Now it has to be
appreciated that whether the said fact will take away the case of
the prosecution. During the Cross Examination of PW29 the IO, it
is pointed out that, the IO has received information regarding
offence on 18.04.2013 at 06.00a.m. in the morning and visited spot
at 07.30 and meanwhile informed PW.1 regarding incident. It is
pointed out that since the police Pre-Judice against A1 hence
called PW1 to inform incident. Another important point raised by
defense is that in-spite of receiving information in the morning at
06.00 a.m. FIR is not registered till lodging of complaint by
SC No. 1108/2013

complainant-PW1 at 9.30 a.m.

122. The other point raised by defense is that there is no
finger print experts were called to identify the finger prints. The
point regarding delay in filing FIR even receiving of information at
6.00 a.m in the morning cannot be said to be fatal to the case of
the prosecution. The FIR is registered at 9.30 a.m after lodging
complaint by PW. 1. This cannot be held as inordinate delay
regarding FIR. It cannot be said in the gap, there is some external
factor intervened to implicate accused.

123. Further PW. 29 the IO admitted that finger print expert
is not called at crime spot. However he denied that finger print
experts called at spot and if the said records produced it reveals
that A1 is not involved in offence. The said fact regarding calling
finger print expert is may be lapse on part of investigating agency,
if the prosecution is able to substantiate the commission of
offence, is sufficient to arrive at the conclusion. During cross-
examination it is tried to assert by the defense that whether the
room was scattered or whether any mark of dragging of body
found. The IO PW. 29 depose that the room in the house were
not scattered and the room where the bodies were laying was
scattered. Further it is also tried to elicit that there was bed and
almera in the room. Further the dimension of room is 10X8 feet
wherein bed covered to extent of 4X6 and almera covered by 2X6.
Same is admitted by PW. 29. The dimension of room is 80 square
feet and 40 square feet was covered by bed and almera. Same is
also admitted by PW. 29. It is tried to elicit and same was denied
by the I.O, that in such small place it is not possible to a man to
kill 2 adult woman. Further it is suggested that when one woman
SC No. 1108/2013

was assaulted by assailant another woman can assault to said
assailant. Further it is suggested that there was child present and
no blood found on the clothes of child. It is not possible in such
room to assault woman without there being blood smear on the
clothes of child. The said suggestion also denied by the I.O. PW.

29. He admitted that there is no blood stains on the bed. He
depose that pillows were blood stained and also found 3 empty
beer cans.

124. It is further elicited by defense that, during cross-
examination of PW.29 that after arrest of A1 he was not subjected
to medical test. It is suggested that at that time there is no sign that
he drunk alcohol. To which PW.29 depose that he was not
subjected to medical examination regarding drinking alcohol. It is
further cross examined that, though the viscera of deceased
collected and subjected to analysis, but report given that alcohol
not found in the body of deceased. To which PW.29 depose that,
the said report shows that in the test conducted the articles not
responded.

125. Another fact is tried to be elicited that, the said
deceased women aged 38 and 36 years and they were well built.
To which PW.9 depose it depends on the physical and medical
condition of those women. PW.9 admit that at the time of incident
A1 aged 56 years. It is suggested a person aged 56 years cannot
assault and kill women aged 38 and 36 years, the same is denied
by PW.29. It is also suggested that, if a person assaulting, to save
life they might have counter attack assailant. The said suggestion
is denied by PW.29. He admits that no injury mark found on body
of A1. It is suggested that since he is not participated in the said
SC No. 1108/2013

offence no marks found. The said suggestion also denied by
PW.29.

126. The point which are raised during cross-examination
are need to be analyzed. The present case is based on
circumstantial evidence. The offence committed within four walls of
the house. There is no eye witness to the said offence. The
commission of offence has to be inferred from the material
evidence placed before the court and also on proved facts and
circumstances. It is found from evidence that the entire home is
not scattered only a room, where bodies found was scattered. By
this it is clear that the incident took place in a room where bodies
found. During the incident or commission of offence the room got
scattered. Further it is clear that the deceased were assaulted in
the said room only, as there is no mark of dragging bodies. At this
juncture it is relevant to analyze Ex.P3 to 10 the photographs of
bodies. Ex.P3 and 9 are the photos of dead body of Preethy.
Ex.P6, 7 are the photos of dead body of Veda and Ex.P5, 8 and 10
are the photos of dead bodies together. On careful perusal of
these exhibits, it is found that, the said deceased were assaulted
in the said room only. The said deceased were might have sitting
on the floor where they were assaulted. As because there are no
blood stains found on the bed but found on the wall where
deceased Veda lying. There is no blood found except the place
where the dead bodies lying. If the deceased were on the bed or
other part of room where they assaulted there will be blood on
those parts. From this it can be inferred that the deceased were
sitting on the floor where they were assaulted and on assault they
layed there only.
SC No. 1108/2013

127. Now coming to the defense of accused, it is point of
defense that, the room measure 80 sq. ft. and there are coat and
almera . They cover 40 sq. ft. and in such conditions and in
remaining small place, it is not possible for a person to assault two
woman. As stated above the said women were assaulted in the
room when they were sitting. On perusal of Exhibits 3 to 10 there
is no sign of struggle when they were assaulted. The said bodies
were found in pool of blood. They were assaulted on head. The
said assault was made when they were in stagnant position may
be sitting. This can happen when the injured is not in a condition to
make major movement. It can be inferred that the said deceased
were made to drink and when they were inebriation they were
assaulted on head. Otherwise if they were in awaken conditions
there was struggle and when they got injured on initial blow, they
might make movement and try to escape and the blood will be
splashed in other parts of room. But there is no sign of trying to
escape by deceased. On perusal of flow of blood and blood
stains it is found that they were assaulted with object many times
with great force. The assailant was well aware about the condition
of women and the said assault does not seems to be result of
sudden provocation or act of sudden reaction. The assailant with
all care and caution, planned and looking to the condition,
assaulted the deceased without giving room to escape.

128. It is necessary to observe that there are two woman
present at the spot. There might be situation that, when assailant
assaulting one woman, then other might try to rescue woman who
was under assault. But their condition may such that they cannot
fully resist assailant. The said Veda resisted and same can be
SC No. 1108/2013

ascertained by Ex.P53 the opinion of PM report No.179/2013 of
Veda, wherein it is mentioned that external injury no.6 and 7 could
have been caused during struggle (defense wounds) i.e.,
contusion measuring 8x9 cm present over middle part of back of
both side of forearm. Contusion measuring 4x4 cm present over
the back of both hand. This revels that there is struggle between
assailant and deceased Vedha during assault and there were
defense wounds on forearm and back of hand, but still she was
assaulted on her head and done to death.

129. It is pertinent to observed that the deceased were
insuch condition that they are not in a position resist while they
were assaulted. This leads to infer that they were inebriation
condition. It is not in dispute that 3 empty beer cans found in the
room near the dead body, same can be ascertained from Ex.P2
spot mahazer and also the evidence of witnesses. However the
FSL report, Ex.P60 speaks that, the colour test and gas
chromatographic methods have not responded for the presence of
ethyl alcohol in article no.1,2,3,5,6 and 7. No other poison was
detected in the articles. The articles are viscera of deceased
Preethy stomach and its contents, portion of lever and kidney and
blood and viscera of deceased Veda, portion of lever and kidney
and blood. The reports states that, the articles does not respond to
the test for presence of alcohol, but the condition of dead body
reveals that the deceased were assaulted when they were in
stagnant position without any movement. On perusal of Ex.P.3 to
10, if dead bodies seen it can be inferred that under two
conditions such assaulte can be made, when the victim was
sleeping or when because of intoxication or other reasons the
SC No. 1108/2013

victim was not in a position to make major movement. The Ex.P3
to 10 and condition of dead bodies do not reveal that there exists
any sign of struggle or sign of escape that even blood not found on
bed. It is not in dispute that deceased were assaulted by assailant.
The victims were assaulted on head with great force and no
chance given to them to escape or even chance to resist which
can be ascertained from opinion PM report where there is no
struggle or defense wound on the body of deceased Preethy. It is
very much clear that they were brutally assaulted on there head.
That PM report of Preethy and Veda Ex.P47 and 50 reveals that all
the injuries were ante mortem. That the injuries cause before
death. Clearly speaks that they are assaulted on their head and
due to head injuries they succumbed to death.

130. The defense of accused is that A1 aged 56 years and
the deceased women aged 38 and 36 years, it is not possible to
assault two woman aged 38 and 36 years and kill them by 56
years aged person. The point is to be observed that, it depends
upon the condition of women who were assaulted. As discussed
earlier the deceased were assaulted in such condition when they
were not in a position to make major movement or they may be
under the influence of alcohol or for other reason, at that time, it is
possible to assault woman who were under such condition. As
discussed earlier at the cost of repetition there is no dispute that
deceased found dead and they were assaulted on their head. If
the condition are such that they are not in a position to resist, the
person aged 56 years can assault woman aged 38 and 36 years
and kill them.

131. The other defense of the accused that, a child was
SC No. 1108/2013

present in the house at the time of incident and in a room under
such condition and in small portion of room, it is not possible to
assault two woman without there being blood stains on the cloths
of child. It is very pertinent to observe that, from evidence it do not
reveal where the child was in the said home. Even none of
witness speak where the child was. That child may be in the room
where deceased found dead as because on the day of incident the
witnesses heard scream of child and woman. There is every
possibility in a condition where dead bodies found, there is no
blood stains on the cloths of child. It is not clear from evidence in
which part of room child was there. As discussed above except the
portion of room where dead bodies found there is no blood stains
in other part of room, that even on bed or cot which was beside the
dead bodies lying. Hence there is every possibility that blood
stains may not fall on the clothes of child when deceased
assaulted.

132. On appreciation of entire evidence in this regard the
testimony of 1,3,5and 8 reveals that A1 was present in his house a
day before incident and on the day of incident. PW.3 and 5 speaks
that there was quarrel between A1 and Preethy in the said night of
incident. The testimony of PW.1 corroborates the testimony of
PW.3 and 5. wherein she depose that, Preethy called her
expressed fear and life threat. Further PW.3 and 10 depose that,
on the day of incident at night at 1.30 AM they heard scream of
woman and child. PW.3 further states that, he saw A1 going out of
his house. The evidence of prosecution reveals that, the said
deceased found dead in the room and their dead body found in
pool of blood. The medical evidence mainly the evidence of PW.26
SC No. 1108/2013

reveals that, the deceased were assaulted with type of weapon
MO.1 Iron Rod. The said Injuries are possible if the said MO.1 use
to assault. The deceased were assaulted on head and death is
due to shock and hammerhage as a result of severe head injuries.

133. As discussed earlier there is no material or evidence of
presence of fourth person, other-than Preethy and Veda and her
child and A1 in the house on the relevant time on the day of
incident. The condition of dead bodies points that, the deceased
were assaulted on head in a condition, when they were not in a
position to make major movement as there is no sign of struggle or
escape, it is inferred as because the blood is only on the floor and
there is no blood stains on other parts of room except the portion
where dead bodies were lying and not even on the bed which is
beside the dead bodies. It leads to infer that assailant observing
condition of two woman assaulted on head with force without
giving chance to escape. All these facts leads to infer that apart
from Preethy, Veda and child A1 was present in the spot and he
made such condition that Preethy and Veda should not escape or
make major movement and assaulted them with hard object MO.1
Iron rod on the head of deceased brutally and cause bleeding
injuries and due to head injuries the said deceased succumbed to
death. He killed Veda also because she might disclose the fact
regarding murder of Preethy or during assault on Preethy she tried
to rescue her and out of anger A1 also killed Veda by assaulting
on her head and murdered both Preethy and Veda.

132(a) The act of A1 in given condition as discussed earlier
is per-meditated and planned, that both deceased were brought to
such condition that there shall not be resistance and escape. The
SC No. 1108/2013

assault was brutal and which cause death of both. A1 have
knowledge and intention and he Know that assault is so
immensely dangerous that in all probability death will cause and
his act causes bodily injury as his likely to cause death and from
the condition of accused it is clear that A1 incurs no remorse. The
act of A1 squarely comes under
Section 300(4)
of IPC.

VIII] Motive

134. In a case rests on circumstantial evidence the
existence of motive assumes significance though the absence of
motive does not necessarily discredit the prosecution case. In this
case there is ample evidence on the record to show that A1 had
motive to commit the alleged offence. It is the argument of defense
that, motive in this case is very weak. The prosecution did not
established motive in this case. A1 had no motive to commit crime.
It is argued that, the prosecution relied on two cases filed by
deceased Preethy. A1 got upset with lodging of complaint and
committed crime. But in the said two cases A1 was acquitted for
lack of evidence. It is argued that after lapse of nine months from
two cases the incident took place. There is no connection between
two cases and alleged incident. It is also argued, that if A1
harassed Preethy why she was residing with A1. It is also tried to
put out during cross-examination and even in written submission
submitted by A1 that, A1 is a good charactered person, he used to
work, look-after family, he has no drinking habit and he has good
reputation as he was honored with many awards. He also placed
records along with written submission to show that he is a good
SC No. 1108/2013

person and had no melafide intentin. By that it is tried to prove that
there is no motive to kill deceased Preethy and Veda.

135. The prosecution case in this regard is that A1 had two
unsuccessful marriage and with deceased Preethy he had 3 rd
marriage. He was in the habit of drinking. After marriage A1 started
harass deceased Preethy both physically and mentally. He forced
her to go out and work, lookafter family and manage house. There
is dispute between A1 and Preethy and there is no cordial
relationship. The deceased Preethy after bearing harassment
lodged complaints before Girinagar P.S. and A1 was arrested and
sent to Jail and after returning from jail, the harassment
aggravated. Again Preethy lodged complaint before police and
again A1 was sent to jail After returning from jail harassment of A1
intensified, he use to threaten Preethy stating that she sent him jail
and he was humiliated and he will kill here and threatened her with
dire consequences and he had intention to kill for all she had done
and as a result he murdered Preethy and Veda.

136. The prosecution witness mainly PW.1, 3, 4, 5,8 and 9
testify that there is quarrel between A1 and Preethy. There was rift
and dispute between A1 and Preethy. The relationship was not
cordial. The testimony of these witnesses discussed in the earlier
part i.e. strain relationship between A1 and Preethy. They speak
that, the said Preethy use to share fact regarding harassment by
A1. The said witness heard quarrel between A1 and Preethy on
daily basis. The said Preethy was very much disturbed by the
same. She shared her agony with each one of the witnesses
stated above. The prosecution witnesses mainly PW.3, 4, 5, 8 and
9 specifically supported the fact that there was dissension between
SC No. 1108/2013

A1 and Preethy. A1 use to harass her. The said Preethy after
bearing harassment lodged two complaints in CC No.21188/2012
and CC No.22335/2012 (Ex.12 to 17). The said lodging of 1st
complaint before Girinagar police for the harassment to which said
PW.3 is witness. A1 was arrested on the basis of complaints and
sent to jail and after returning from jail the harassment got
aggravated by A1. Further again she lodged complaint before
police and again he was arrested and sent to jail and he was
released on bail. After returning from jail, A1 humiliated by that
and annoyed started to harass Preethy and threatened her with
dire consequences.

137. On perusal of Ex.P12 and 13 two complaints filed by
Preethy against A1 reveals that she was subjected to harassment
by A1. The said fact is corroborated by the testimony of PW.1
mother of Preethy and PW.3, 4, 5, 8 and even by PW.16 the
principal of Little Flower School where Preethy was working as
teacher. The said Preethy about to leave A1 and go back to
Bombay and same is also testified by the witnesses PW.3, 8, 9
and 16. They speaks that Preethy told them that she is going back
to Bombay as it is impossible to live with A1. The testimony of
PW.1,3 and 5 reveals that, after coming back from jail the quarrel
between A1 and Preethy get aggravated and harassment got
intensified. This leads to infer that A1 annoyed by same, which
leads to develop enmity. PW.1 depose that on the day of incident
Preethy contacted her and said Peethy was under fear and life
threat as A1 quarreling with her since morning. The facts leads to
infer that there is dispute between A1 and Preethy when Preethy
lodged complaints and A1 was arrested and sent to jail he got
SC No. 1108/2013

humiliated and developed enmity on Preethy. This again infuses to
infer as because, as per A1 he was well reputed musician and he
was honored with awards and he visited many events and places
like SAARC and Maldives. He was well respected in the society.
But the act of Preethy lodging complaint and sending him jail might
annoyed him and that leads to develop enmity and in order to take
revenge he hatched plan to eliminate Preethy. The fact that he had
some intention or design to do something to Preethy, the said fact
be inferred when he brought 3 beer cans from PW.17's bar. The
said PW.17 testified that the said A1 came to his bar on the day of
incident i.e., 17.04.2013 at 10.30 P.M in the night, he took parcel of
3 tins of beer. PW.17 also identifies MO.5 to 7 the said 3 beer
cans. The said 3 tins found near the dead bodies of Preethy and
Veda. This leads to infer that A1 has developed enmity against
Preethy and as discussed earlier the condition in which dead
bodies found indicates that the murder was planned and
executed. The said planning may not be done without motive of
eliminating Preethy. Therefore it is held that prosecution has
successfully established the existence of motive on the part of the
accused to commit crime.

IX] Recovery of Incriminating Article;

138. It is the case of the prosecution that, the said crime
committed by using MO.1 Iron Rod, the deceased were assaulted
on the head with Iron rod and cause bleeding injury due to said
head injury the deceased were succumb to death. In an criminal
case the recovery of incriminating article is one of the important
fact to be established by the prosecution. To establish the said fact
the prosecution examined PW.2, 7 and 29. PW.2 and 7 are the
SC No. 1108/2013

punch witness to the spot mahazer and recovery mahazer. PW.29
is the investigating officer. Ex.P2 is the spot mahazer conducted
on 18.04.2013 and Ex.P-11 the recovery mahazer which is
mentioned as running panchanama dated 18.04.2013. To prove
the said recovery the prosecution relied upon evidence of PW.2
and PW.7. PW. 2 depose that, he and CW.3 heard that there is a
murder in the house behind Nanda Gokul Kalyan Mantapa and
they want to see. At that time Girinagar Police ask him to be panch
witness. He agreed to the same. In his presence spot mahazer is
conducted and the police have collected the blood samples and
articles mainly two pillows and three kingfishers beer tins. The
police drawn the mahazer and he signed to the said mahazer.
Further he identified the Ex.P2 spot mahazer and his signature.
He also identified signature on MO.1 to7. Further he identified the
deceased Preethi and Veda in Ex.P3 to 10 photographs. He
further depose that, in the evening at 5.15 again police were called
him to be a witness for the recovery at the instance of accused
no.1. He depose that, accused no.1 led the police to his house and
he took to his room opposite to the room where dead bodies
found. There he produced one track pant, black and red color half
shirt which were put in hanger. The said clothes were blood
stained. Police seized the same and drawn mahazar Ex.P. 11.
The said mahazar written in the evening 5.54 p.m From there at 50
meters he took them to place where he hidden said rod which was
use to commit offence. The said place is a drainage between two
vacant sites. There was no water flowing. There he produced one
iron rod which had blood stains. The said article was seized. He
identified the mahazar and signature on mahazar and MO.1.
SC No. 1108/2013

139. Further PW. 7 examined by prosecution to establish
the fact of recovery. The said witness also depose in the line of
PW. 2. the testimony of PW. 7 is similar to PW. 2. He has also
identified mahazar at Ex.P.2 and 11. The testimony of both
witnesses is corroborative to each other. Both the witnesses are
cross examined by A1 and his counsel. If the line of cross-
examination of PW. 1 and 11 is carefully analyzed there is
consistency in the evidence of PW. 2 and 11. The cross-
examination is in the line of suggestion almost in the line of
admitting the facts and circumstances of recovery. There is an
attempt to elicit disruption of places both home of A1 and place
from where MO. 15 rod is recovered. Only denial statements in
cross-examination to elicit contradiction and omission in the
evidence of PW. 2 and 7. But PW. 2 and 7 withstood their version
of evidence. The testimony of PW 2 and 7 is consistent.

140. However it is argued by defense that as per the
evidence of Pw. 29 I.O. He has visited house of A1 in the morning
and drawn mahazar in the morning and depose that he searched
house of A1, collected articles. If that is the case why the PW. 2
and 7 are called again in the evening at 5.00 p.m to draw mahazar.
The said pant and shirt MO. 13 and 14 may be recovered in the
morning during spot mahazar when I.O. visited crime spot. It is
argued that the said fact creates doubt regarding drawing of
mahazar and recovery of articles.

141. During cross-examination of PW. 29 it is elicited that
I.O. inspected entire house and recovered articles. He depose that
in other room he has not seized any articles. That MO. 15 is not
recovered during spot mahazar. Here it is one interesting
SC No. 1108/2013

suggestion put that I.O. has not suspected PW. 1 complainant.
PW. 29 depose that there is no reason to suspect PW. 1. To which
defense put up suggestion that, the assailant knowing fully well
about weapon and to escape from offence lodged complaint
stating that with the same weapon offence was committed. The
theory of defense try to put up is that PW. 1 assaulted deceased
and to escape from alleged offence and to project herself as
innocent, points at the weapon MO. 15 that with the said MO. 15
deceased were assaulted. At this juncture the defense points at
evidence of PW. 1. where as per complainant MO. 15 iron rod was
laying beside dead body. The said part of complaint is marked as
Ex.D.1. It is pointed out that as per other witnesses to mahazar,
MO. 15 was recovered somewhere else. By this it is tried to
dispense the recovery.

142. During cross-examination of PW. 29 it is suggested that
there is no problem to draw separate mahazar as there is running
mahazar. To which PW. 29 depose that there is no necessity to
draw separate mahazar. It is also suggested that in the mahazar
wright and dimension of iron rod not mentioned which is denied by
PW. 29.

143. If the testimony of PW. 2 and 7 and 29 appreciated,
PW. 2 and 7 consistently stated that they were present during
mahazar both at the time of drawing mahazar Ex.P. 2 and 11 the
spot mahazar and running mahazar. During drawing of Ex.P.11
accused led the police and police recovered MO. 13 and 14 blood
stained pant and shirt and MO. 15 iron rod. Here the relevant point
to be observed that the recovery of MO. 13 and 14 the track pant
and shirt is not convincing. If carefully observed and analyzed why
SC No. 1108/2013

an assailant keep blood stained clothes putting them in hanger. He
always try to conceal the articles and not put them in a room in a
hanger. However the said articles are recovered by I.O. but in
respect of recovery of MO. 15 the testimony of witnesses mainly
PW. 2 and 7 is consistent. The defense also not able to discredit
the testimony of these witnesses. Even during cross-examination
of PW. 29 It is only suggested that there must be separate
mahazar. But there is no dispute regarding recovery. It is only
stated during spot mahazar MO. 15 is not seized, apart from this
suggestion there is no cross-examination in the line to disprove or
discredit the recovery of M.O. 15 . The testimony of PW. 2 and 7 is
not countered with PW. 29. However the lapses on the part of
defense cannot be considered. But the testimony of PW 2 and 7 is
very consistent regarding recovery of MO. 15. They withstood
their version. There is no single deviation in their version. Further
there is no reason to disbelieve the version of PW. 2 and 7.
however the theory of defense regarding PW. 1 is the person who
assaulted deceased with MO. 15 and points at MO. 15 is not
acceptable. The said theory is vague. The version of defense as
per Ex.D. 1 that as per complaint M.O 15 found near dead bodies
may be a exaggeration by PW. 1. That none of the witnesses who
described crime spot and laying of dead bodies have stated
regarding iron rod found near dead bodies. Even PW. 2 and 7
have not stated that. On over all appreciation of evidence in
respect to recovery of incriminating articles the testimony of PW. 2
and 7 is consistent and there is no material to discredit the same.
Hence it can be held that the prosecution has proved recovery of
incriminating articles mainly MO. 15.
SC No. 1108/2013

X] PRINCIPLES IN CASES BASED ON CIRCUMSTANTIAL
EVIDENCE

144. As it could be seen from the facts and evidence that
entire case rests on circumstances. The Hon`ble Supreme Court
of India in Sharad Birdichand Sarda vs State of Maharastra
observed that;

152. Before discussing the cases relied upon by the
High Court we would like to cite a few decisions on the
nature, character and essential proof required in a
criminal case which rests on circumstancial evidence
alone. The most fundamental and basic decisions of
this Court is
Hanumant vs. State of Madhya Pradesh
.

This case has been uniformly followed and applied by
this Court in a large number of later decisions upto date
for instance, the cases of Tufail (Alias) Simmi vs. State
of Uttar Pradesh and
Ramgopal vs. State of
Maharashtra
.

It may be useful to extract what Mahajan,
J. has
laid down in

Hanumanth
case;

"It is well to remember that in cases where the
evidence is of a circumstantial nature, the
circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to
be drawn should in the first instance be fully
established, and all the facts so established should be
consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the
accused. Again, the circumstances should be of a
conclusive nature and tendency and they should be
such as to exclude every hypothesis but the one
proposed to be proved. In other words, there must be a
chain of evidence so far complete as not to leave any
reasonable grounds for a conclusion consistent with the
innocence of the accused and it must be such as to
show that within all human probability the act must have
been done by the accused."

153. A close analysis of this decision would show that
the following conditions must be fulfilled before a case
SC No. 1108/2013

against an accused can be said to be fully established:

(1) the circumstances from which the conclusion of
guilt is to be drawn should be fully established.

It may be noted here that this Court indicate that the
circumstances concerned "must or should" and not
"may be" established. There is not only a grammatical
but a legal distinction between "may be proved" and
"must be or should be proved" as was held by this Court
in Shivaji Shahabro Bobade vs. State of Maharashtra
where the observations were made: (SCC para 19,
p.807: SCC (Cri) p.1047)
"Certainly, it is a primary principle that the accused
must be and not merely, may be guilty before a court
can convict and the material distance between 'may
be' and 'must be' is long and divides vague conjectures
from sure conclusion".

(2) the fact so established should be consistent only
with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, that is to
say, they should not be explainable on any other
hypothesis except that the accused is guilty,
(3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive
nature and tendency,
(4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis
except the one to be proved, and
(5) there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not
to leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion
consistent with the innocence of the accused and must
show that in all human probability the act must have
been done by the accused.

154. these five golden principles, if we may say so,
constitute the panchsheel of the proof of a case based
on circumstantial evidence.

If the principles envisaged in the above authority if applied to the
present case it has to be seen whether the prosecution passes
through the tests of five golden principles explained by Hon`ble
Apex Court as a 'panchsheel'. On appreciation of the evidence in
this case in totality, it can be inferred that the prosecution is able
to establish the circumstances. It is not in dispute that the
SC No. 1108/2013

deceased Preethy Acharya is the wife of A1. It is also not in
dispute that they both living together in the house of A1 which is
the crime spot. The prosecution examined PW. 3,4,5,6,8,9 and 10
the neighbors of A1 and Preethy Acharya who resided in the same
building where the deceased Preethy and A1 resided. They have
been examined to establish the strain relationship between A1 and
Preethy Acharya and also to establish the very crucial point that A1
use to harass Preethi Acharya and they have witnessed the said
facts which they depose in their evidence. The prosecution is able
to establish the fact that there is a strain relationship between A1
and deceased Preerthy and A1 use to harass Preethy Acharya.

145. The prosecution examined PW. 1,3,5,8 to establish the
fact that on the day of incident and prior to the day of incident the
accused No.1 was present in the house and there is quarrel
between A1 and deceased Preethy. The fact is the offence
committed within the closed walls of house of accused No.1.
There is no eye witnesses. The commission of offence has to be
inferred from the material available on record. On appreciation of
evidence mainly Ex.P.3 to 10 the photographs of dead bodies and
relevant records the said assault on both deceased were brutal
and on keen observation of the records it can be inferred that they
were assaulted under such circumstances where the deceased
were not able to make major movement like struggle or escape as
counter attack. They were assaulted in such a manner, they
succumbed to death on the spot only. This fact is very relevant
because the A1 raised plea of alibi stating that he was not present
on 16,17 and 18th of April 2013. However as discussed supra the
SC No. 1108/2013

plea of alibi raised by A1 is not sufficiently established and same is
not acceptable. In this regard the prosecution is able to prove the
fact through the above said witnesses that, A1 was present on the
date of incident. The prosecution has examined PW. 1,3 and 10 to
establish the fact that on the day of incident there is a quarrel
between A1 and deceased Preethy and PW. 3 and 10 have
depose regarding screaming sound of woman and child heard by
these witnesses and PW. 3 depose that after hearing the sound
he saw A1 going out of house and on the next day the said
deceased Preethy and Veda found dead in the house of A1.
Further the prosecution is able to prove that there was a motive
to commit offence by the A1 by producing oral as well as
documentary evidence. Prosecution examined PW. 1,3,4,5,8, 9
that there is a strain relationship and due to that there was a
quarrel between A1 and Preethy and A1 use to harass both
physically and mentally. This fact is corroborated by the
documentary evidence, the prosecution produced documents
relating to two complaints lodged by Preethy against A1 for the
domestic violence and criminal intimidation. This fact regarding
motive is a mental condition , it can be inferred from the facts and
circumstances placed before court. It is the fact that the accused
No.1 is a musician, he claims to be the reputed person in the
society and when he was arrested and sent to jail he get
humiliated and because of that he annoyed that leads to develop
enmity against deceased Preethy Acharya and that leads to
commission of present crime.

146. Now with regard to recovery though recovery of MO. 13
and 14 is not so convincing but with regard to recovery of MO. 15
SC No. 1108/2013

iron rod the evidence of PW. 2 and 7 is consistent and there is no
material to discredit the said evidence.

147. By appreciating all these evidence it can be said that
the circumstances are fully established and the circumstances
consistent with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused and if
the circumferences which are established are carefully observed
they are conclusive in nature. As discussed earlier also accused
No.1 is the only person who was present on the date of incident
apart from deceased Preethy, Veda and a child of Veda and there
is no intervention of 4th person on the day of incident. The said
circumstances will exclude every possible hypothesis except which
is proved and the chain of evidence which are produced before the
court is consistent which leave no reasonable ground for the
conclusion with the innocence of the accused and in all human
probability the act is done by the accused No.1 himself. By this it
can be safely inferred that the chain of circumstances were fully
established which is consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt
of the accused. The prosecution has passed the test of
panchsheel as observed by Hon`ble Apex Court in the above case.

148. As observed by the Hon`ble Apex Court in Bagathram
vs. State of Punjan AIR 1954 SC 621 it was laid down that; where
the case depends upon the conclusion drawn from circumstances,
the cumulative effect of the circumstances must be such as to
negative the innocence of the accused and bring the offences
home beyond any reasonable doubt. In the present case also if
evidence of various facts taken together, they form a chain of
circumstances from which the existence of principal fact can be
legally presumed. The chain of circumstances which are
SC No. 1108/2013

established by prosecution there is an inference that the accused
is the author of the death of both deceased.

149. On appreciation of the evidence there are minor
discrepancies in the evidence of the proseuction placed before this
court. As observed by the Hon`ble Apex Court in AIR 2009 SC
2959 (
Mallappa Siddappa Alakanur and others vs State of
Karnataka
)
The High Court, firstly, found fault with the Trial Court's
approach in rejecting the testimony of the witness on
immaterial and unsubstantial contradictions not relating to
vital and relevant aspects.

The High Court also reiterated
the law
laid down by
this Court in Ramesh S/o
Laxman
Gawli vs. State of MP & Ors
Etc. reported in 2000 (1) SCC
243 to the effect that the contradictions, inconsistencies,
exaggerations or embellishments, minor discrepancies or
variance in the evidence do not make the prosecution
doubtful. On the other hand they lend credibility to the
prosecution version. Even as regards the principles of
dealing with the judgment of acquittal, the High Court relied
on the judgment reported as Allarakha K mansuri vs. State
of Gujarat [2002 (3) SCC 57] wherein this Court has
reiterated the duty to avoid miscarriage of justice arising
from acquittal of guilty. Therefore, it cannot be said that the
High Court was not alive to the fact that it was dealing with
the judgment of acquittal. The high court has correctly
proceeded to consider the evidence.

In this case also there are minor discrepancies. But the said minor
discrepancies in the testimony of witnesses will not take away the
entire case of the prosecution. If the evidence is appreciated in its
totality the prosecution is able to prove the guilt of the accused
No.1 through circumstantial evidence.
SC No. 1108/2013

VII] DEFENSE OF accusedD AND FACTS WITHIN HIS
KNOWLEDGE

150. If the defense of the accused is looked into there is no
consistency in the defense of the accused. The said defenses
were discussed supra. There is no specific or concrete defense
put forth by accused No.1. The attempt is only to point out the
lacunas in the prosecution, except the cross examination of IO.
The cross-examination of all the witnesses is without any line of
defense. On one hand he try to put up case that the first husband
of Preethy had dispute with her and another he puts up suggestion
that son of Ramdas use to call deceased Preethy and insist her to
marry him and further another defense put forth by A1 that the
deceased Preethy had dispute with many persons. All these
defenses were to deviate the prosecution case towards the other
persons. Apart from this another strong defense put up by the
accused No.1 is that the PW. 1 mother of deceased Preethy is the
culprit. She herself has assaulted deceased with rod and
committed their murder. That being the case of the defense in
respect of commission of offence by other persons, but none of the
defenses is probable enough to suspect the version of the
prosecution.

151. As observed earlier the plea of alibi by A1 is not
acceptable. Now A1 has to explain regarding facts which are within
his knowledge. Though he has submitted in his written submission
denying case of prosecution and explaining certain facts, but the
facts and circumstances put up by the prosecution is consistent
and points at the guilt of the accused No.1. The explanation which
are submitted by A1 are not sufficient as the plea of alibi which he
SC No. 1108/2013

puts up has failed. That being so now he has to come up with
explanation what has happened on the day of incident. It is not in
dispute said deceased Preethy and Veda are murdered and it is
not disputed that there is disturbance between A1 and Preethy
and she has lodged complaints. The offence being committed in a
closed walls and he being husband of deceased Preethy it Is
incumbent upon him to offer reasonable and plausible explanation.
As observed by the Hon`ble Apex Court in
State Of Rajasthan vs
Kashi Ram
2007 (1) SCC (Cri) 688.

It is not necessary to multiply with authorities. The
principle is well settled. The provisions of
Section 106

of the Evidence Act itself are unambiguous and
categoric in laying down that when any fact is
especially within the knowledge of a person, the
burden of proving that fact is upon him. Thus, if a
person is last seen with the deceased, he must offer
an explanation as to how and when he parted
company. He must furnish an explanation which
appears to the Court to be probable and satisfactory.
If he does so he must be held to have discharged his
burden. If he fails to offer an explanation on the basis
of facts within his special knowledge, he fails to
discharge the burden casts upon him by
Section 106

of the Evidence Act. In a case resting on
circumstantial evidence if the accused fails to offer a
reasonable explanation in discharge of the burden
placed on him, that itself provides an additional link in
the chain of circumstances proved against him.

Section 106
does not shift the burden of proof in a
criminal trial, which is always upon the prosecution. It
lays down the rule that when the accused does not
throw any light upon facts which are specially within
his knowledge and which could not support any
theory or hypothesis compatible with his
innocence,the Court can consider his failure to
adduce any explanation, as an additional link which
SC No. 1108/2013

completes the chain. The principle has been
succinctly stated in Re. Naina Mohd. AIR 1960
Madras, 218.

Further in (2014) 4 SCC 42 in case of
Joshinder Yadav vs. State
of Bihar
it is observed as under;

16. In our opinion, the prosecution having established
that the accused treated the deceased with cruelty
and that they subjected her to harassment for dowry,
the accused ought to have disclosed the facts which
were in their person and special knowledge to
disprove the prosecution case that they murdered
Bindulal Devi.
Sec. 106
of the Evidence Act covers
such a situation. The burden which had shifted to the
accused was not discharged by them.
In this
connection, we may usefully refer to the judgment of
this Court in
Shambhu Nath Mehra v. State of Ajmer
.
Wherein this Court explained how
Section 101
and

Section 106
of the Evidence Act operate. Relevant
portion of
the said judgment
reads thus;

"10.
Section 106
is an exception to
Section 101
.

Section 101
lays down the general rule about the
burden of proof.

101. Burden of proof - Whoever desires any court to
give judgment as to any legal right or liability
dependent on the existence of facts which he asserts,
must prove that those facts exist.'
Illustration (a) says) -
SC No. 1108/2013

'A desires a court to give judgment that B shall be
punished for a crime which A says B has
committed.

A must prove that B has committed the crime'

11. This lays down the general rule that in a criminal
case the burden of proof is on the prosecution and

Section 106
is certainly not intended to relieve it of
that duty. On the contrary, it is designed to meet
certain exceptional cases in which it would be
impossible, or at any rate disproportionately difficult,
for the prosecution to establish facts which are
'especially' within the knowledge of the accused and
which he could prove without difficulty or
inconvenience."

17.
In
Balram Prasad Agrawal v. State of Bihar

the prosecution had established the cruel conduct of
the accused i.e. her husband and members of his
family and the sufferings undergone by the deceased
at their hands. The unbearable conduct of the
accused ultimately resulted in her death by drowning
in the well in the courtyard of the accused `s house.
This Court observed that what happened on the
fateful night and what led to the deceased`s falling in
the well was wholly within the personal and special
knowledge of the accused. But they kept mum on this
aspect. This court observed that it is true that the
burden is on the prosecution to prove the case
beyond reasonable doubt. But once the prosecution is
SC No. 1108/2013

found to have shown that the accused were guilty of
persistent conduct of cruelty qua the deceased
spread over years as was well established from the
unshaken testimony of father of the deceased, the
facts which were in the personal knowledge of the
accused who were present in the house on that
fateful night could have been revealed by them to
disprove the prosecution case. This Court observed
that the accused had not discharged the burden
which had shifted to them under
Section 106
of the
Evidence Act. While coming to this conclusion, this
Court relied on Shambhu Nath Mehra.

As per
section 106
of Evidence Act the accused has to say what
are the circumstances which are in his knowledge and what might
had happened when he and deceased were together. The burden
shifts on the accused if the prosecution is successful in
establishing the guilt of the accused. It is on him to explain facts
or place circumstances even probable or mere creating doubt in
the mind of the court regarding his participation in crime is
sufficient. If he fails to do so the court has to presume the
incident and draw inference on the available material on record.
Here in this case the evidence recorded proves that there are
incriminating material against him and points at the guilt of the
accused. All the links of the chain of circumstances has been
established beyond reasonable doubt and the cumulative of these
circumstances drive to draw inference as to the guilt of the
accused No.1 and the facts and circumstances are found to be
SC No. 1108/2013

incompatible with the innocence of the accused. Hence looked
from any angle it has to be now stated that, the prosecution case
points to the guilt of the accused No.1 only. Hence he is found
guilty for the offence of committing murder of deceased Preethy
acharya and Veda which is punishable under
Sec. 302
of IPC.
Accordingly, point No.2 is answered in affirmative.

152. POINT NO.3: REGARDING COMMON INTENTION
AND CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY ; It is the case of the prosecution
that A1 alongwith A2 have conspired to kill Preethy, in that regard
charges were framed u/sec. 109, 120B r/w 34 of
IPC
. It is the
allegation of the prosecution against A2 that A1 and A2 discussed
with regard to commission of offence. A1 called A2 in the night at
9.50 p.m on 17.4.2013 and told that he intends to kill Preethy
Acharya and Veda and he questioned him that how he will kill
them. He told that Preethy Acharya like to drink beer very much
and he will made them to drink and when they were inebriation he
will kill her, hence A2 provoked him and advised him to kill. It is
the further case of the prosecution that after sometime again A1
telephoned to him and has stated that he assaulted his wife with
iron rod and when Veda intervened he also assaulted Veda and
committed murder. And further he stated that he is going to escape
and he should not give his phone numbers to others. Hence by
that the A2 conspired with A1 and also abated to eliminate
deceased Preethy Acharya.

153. In order to prove the said fact prosecution examined
PW. 29. According to the prosecution soon after the commission of
the offence A1 contacted A2 to his mobile. The prosecution
provides no evidence regarding the mobile phone of A2. No doubt
SC No. 1108/2013

A1 may be called A2 and there may be conversation between
them. The said fact is only a circumstantial available on record on
the basis of which A2 Prabhakar has been arrayed as A2
alongwith A1 on the ground of conspiracy. In the absence of any
evidence that they have recovered the mobile phone of A2 and
also the said mobile phone belongs to A2, it cannot lead to any
inference that A2 was involved with A1 in the conspiracy to commit
the murder of deceased Preethy and Veda. According to the
prosecution they have collected the call details. But there is no
material on record that there is a prior meeting of mind between
A1 and A2 to design the crime of murder of deceased Preethy.
Further on perusal of the entire material on record the prosecution
has not placed any cogent and satisfactory evidence that A2 called
A1 and instigated him to kill Preethy. The allegations against A2
are that he has abated A1. During the evidence of PW. 29 the
prosecution is unable to place on record that they have prior
meeting or there was conversation between them regarding these
aspect mainly to plan and to execute the murder of Preethy.
However it is clear from the evidence that as stated above the
prosecution unable to place the call details between A1 and A2.
On appreciation of material placed on record apart from statement
of A2 and suggestions made during the cross examination
absolutely there is no material placed regarding conspiracy to
commit offence.

154. As per the provision u/sec. 120 (A) there must be a prior
meeting of minds to plan and execute the said offence. The
criminal conspiracy is done in privacy and in secrecy. The direct
evidence in proof of criminal conspiracy is not available. Offence of
SC No. 1108/2013

conspiracy can be proved by either direct or circumstantial
evidence. It is always not possible to give affirmative evidence to
prove formation of criminal conspiracy. The persons who involved
in the formation of conspiracy and the object, all these are matter
of inference, but to draw inference the prosecution has to place
certain cogent and considerable material that there is prior
meeting of minds to design the said crime as stated above. So far
as the allegation of conspiracy against A2 the prosecution failed to
provide any cogent evidence that there is a conversation between
A1 and A2. There is no recovery of mobile phones from which
they have had conversation and the A2 is involved in the alleged
conspiracy to commit the murder. It is also not the case of the
prosecution that A2 use to visit the house of A1 or even he has
visited the house of A1 on the date of incident or prior to the date
of incident. Certainly not necessarily A2 be present in the house of
A1 prior to the day of incident. But there must be substantial
material to show that he has participated remotely in the
commission of offence. There may be a possibility that A1 after
commission of offence would have called A2 to inform, but that
does not amount to criminal conspiracy. As because the criminal
conspiracy requires the prior meeting mind to design the offence.
But here in this case there is no material to show that they have
met and planned and executed the said offence. Apart from the
call details which are not produced before the court there is no
material or evidence to infer that A2 involved in the commission of
offence.

155.
In respect of common intention the Hon'ble Apex court
in
Girija Shankar vs State Of U.P
2004 (1) Crimes 337 (SC)
observed that ;
SC No. 1108/2013

Section 34
has been enacted on the principle of
joint liability in the doing of a criminal act. The
Section is only a rule of evidence and does not
create a substantive offence. The distinctive feature
of the Section is the element of participation in
action. The liability of one person for an offence
committed by another in the course of criminal act
perpetrated by several persons arises under

Section 34
if such criminal act is done in
furtherance of a common intention of the persons
who join in committing the crime. Direct proof of
common intention is seldom available and,
therefore, such intention can only be inferred from
the circumstances appearing from the proved facts
of the case and the proved circumstances. In order
to bring home the charge of common intention, the
prosecution has to establish by evidence, whether
direct or circumstantial, that there was plan or
meeting of mind of all the accused persons to
commit the offence for which they are charged with
the aid of
Section 34
, be it pre-arranged or on the
spur of moment; but it must necessarily be before
the commission of the crime. The true concept of
Section is that if two or more persons intentionally
do an act jointly, the position in law is just the same
as if each of them has done it individually by
himself. As observed in
Ashok Kumar v. State of
Punjab
(AIR 1977 SC 109), the existence of a
common intention amongst the participants in a
crime is the essential element for application of this
Section. It is not necessary that the acts of the
several persons charged with commission of an
offence jointly must be the same or identically
similar. The acts may be different in character, but
SC No. 1108/2013

must have been actuated by one and the same
common intention in order to attract the provision.
The Section does not say "the common intention of
all", nor does it say "and intention common to all".
Under the provisions of
Section 34
the essence of
the liability is to be found in the existence of a
common intention animating the accused leading
to the doing of a criminal act in furtherance of such
intention. As a result of the application of principles
enunciated in
Section 34
, when an accused is
convicted under Section 302 read with
Section 34
,
in law it means that the accused is liable for the act
which cause death of the deceased in the same
manner as if it was done by him alone. The
provision is intended to meet a case in which it
may be difficult to distinguish between acts of
individual members of a party who act in
furtherance of the common intention of all or to
prove exactly what part was taken by each of
them.

As was observed in
Ch. Pulla Reddy and
Ors. v. State of Andhra Pradesh
(AIR 1993 SC
1899),
Section 34
is applicable even if no injury
has been cause by the particular accused himself.
For applying
Section 34
it is not necessary to show
some overt act on the part of the accused.

The prosecution invoke
Section 34
of IPC to establish the common
intention between A1 and A2. But as per the observation of the
Hon`ble Apex court in above stated case the distinct feature of the
section is the element of participation in an action by the accused.
The intention plays prominent role. As per the observation of the
Hon`ble Apex Court the said intention can only be inferred from the
circumstances appearing from the proved facts of the case and
SC No. 1108/2013

also the proved circumstances. The prosecution has to establish
by evidence regarding common intention whether direct or
circumstantial that there was a plan or meeting of mind of the
accused persons to commit the offence. But here in this case on
hand on appreciation of the evidence placed by the prosecution
there is no material to show that there is a prior meeting of mind or
planning to execute the crime by A1 and A2. The prosecution has
not placed material to show that the A2 has participated in this
present crime directly or indirectly. The A1 may be contacted A2
but that cannot be inferred as a common intention. Apart from the
statement of A1 and A2 there is absolutely no incriminating
material against A2 regarding common intention. Hence the
prosecution fails to establish that there is a meeting of mind and
there exists a common intention to murder deceased Preethi and
Veda.

156.
In respect of criminal conspiracy in
Devender Pal
Singh vs. State (NCT) of Delhi
(2002) 2 SCJ 628 the Hon'ble
Supreme Court by its majority, on criminal conspiracy under

Section 120(A)
and
120(B)
of IPC, said thus;-

"The essence of a criminal conspiracy is the
unlawful combination and ordinarily the offence is
complete when the combination is framed. From
this, it necessarily follows that unless the statue to
requires, no overt act need be done in furtherance
of the conspiracy, and that the object of the
combination need not be accomplished, in order to
constitute an indictable offence.

No doubt in the case of conspiracy, there cannot
be any direct evidence. The ingredients of offence
SC No. 1108/2013

are that there should be an agreement between
person who are alleged to conspire and the said
agreement should be for doing an illegal act or for
doing by illegal means an act which itself may not
be illegal. Therefore, the essence of criminal
conspiracy is an agreement to do an illegal act and
such an agreement can be proved either by direct
evidence or by circumstantial evidence or by both,
and it is a matter of common experience that direct
evidence to prove conspiracy is rarely available.
Therefore, the circumstances proved before,
during and after the occurrence have to be
considered to decide about the complicity of the
accused.

The essential ingredient of the offence of criminal
conspiracy is the agreement to commit an offence.
In a case where the agreement is for
accomplishment of an act which by itself
constitutes an offence, then in that event no overt
act is necessary to be proved by the prosecution
because in such a situation criminal conspiracy is
established by proving such an agreement. Where
the conspiracy alleged is with regard to
commission of a serious crime of the nature as
contemplated in section 120B read with the proviso
to sub-section (2) of Section 120B, then in that
event mere proof of an agreement between the
accused for commission of such a crime alone is
enough to bring about a conviction under Section
120B and the proof of any overt act by the accused
or by any one of them would not be necessary. The
provisions, in such a situation, do not require that
each and every person who is a party to the
conspiracy must do some overt act towards the
fulfillment of the object of conspiracy, the essential
SC No. 1108/2013

ingredient being an agreement between the
conspirators to commit the crime and if these
requirements and ingredients are established, the
act would fall within the trapping of the provisions
contained in Section 120B."

157. The prosecution also invoked
section 120(B)
of IPC i.e.
criminal conspiracy by A1 and A2 to commit offence. Already the
evidence in the present case are discussed. On appreciation of the
evidence the essential ingredients of criminal conspiracy is not
forthcoming. The ingredients of the offence of criminal conspiracy
is the agreement to commit an offence. The Hon`ble Apex Court in
the above said authority observes that there must be fulfillment of
essential ingredients that an agreement between the conspirator to
commit the crime. If the requirements are established then the act
falls within
section 120(B)
. But in the present case on appreciation
of the evidence there is no material or evidence on record that
there exists an agreement between the A1 and A2 as a
conspirators to the crime. As discussed above the prosecution has
not placed record regarding common intention between A1 and A2
and there is no meeting of mind. Here also there is no facts or
circumstances placed which indicates that, there is an agreement
between A1 and A2 to commit crime. As stated above except the
call by A1 to A2 there is no substantial material that there is an
agreement between A1 and A2 to eliminate deceased Preethi. As
stated above the accused No.1 may called A2 and would have
stated the commission of crime. But the said fact cannot be
covered under
sec. 120(B)
criminal conspiracy. By this it can be
inferred that the prosecution has failed to fulfill the essential
SC No. 1108/2013

ingredients of criminal conspiracy in the present case. Hence this
court holds that the prosecution has failed to prove that A1 and A2
involved in the conspiracy to commit the murder of deceased
Preethy and Veda and the murder of deceased is an act of criminal
conspiracy between A-1 and A-2 Accordingly point No.3 is held in
negative.

158. POINT NO.4- Discussions on point No.1 and 2
discloses that the offence u/sec. 302 of
IPC
is proved. The act of
A1 is in a given condition as discussed earlier is per-meditated and
planned, that both deceased were brought to such condition that
they should not be resist and escape. The assault was brutal and
which cause death of both deceased. A1 having knowledge and
intention and he know that assault is so immensely dangerous that
in all probability death will cause and his act causes bodily injury
as is likely to cause death. It is clear that the act of A1 is manifest
itself into culpable homicide amounting to murder under
Section
300(4)
of IPC. Therefore the accused No.1 held guilty of the
offence punishable u/sec. 302 of
IPC
.

159. The prosecution failed to prove the participation of A2
in the commission of crime through common intention and criminal
conspiracy. In view of the same accusedd No.2 is not held guilty
for the offence u/sec. 302 of
IPC
.

160. The prosecution has failed to establish that there exists
common intention and the accused No.1 and 2 conspired the
crime to commit murder of deceased Preethy Acharya and Veda.
Since the prosecution has failed to establish regarding common
intention and criminal conspiracy between A1 and A2 through
evidence. Hence accusedd No.1 and 2 are not found guilty for the
SC No. 1108/2013

offence u/sec. 109, 120(B) r/w 34 of
IPC
. In the result, this court
proceeds to pass the following:-

ORDER

In exercise of power vested with this Court
U/
Sec.235(2)
of Criminal Procedure Code, the
accused No.1 B.M.Chandrasekhar @ Chandru s/o
late Manjunath is convicted for the offence punishable
u/sec. 302 of
IPC
.

In exercise of power vested with this Court
U/
Sec.235 (1)
of Criminal Procedure Code, the
accused No.1 B.M.Chandrasekhar @ Chandru s/o
late Manjunath is acquitted for the offence punishable
u/sec. 109, 120(B) r/w 34 of
IPC
.

In exercise of power vested with this Court
U/
Sec.235 (1)
of Criminal Procedure Code, the
accused No.2 Prabhakar C.K. is acquitted for the
offence punishable u/sec. 302,109,120(B) r/w 34 of

IPC
.

Accused No.2 is set at liberty if he is not
required in any other case.

Having regard to the nature of the offence, it is
not a fit case to extend the benefit of P.O. Act to
Accused No.1.

The Mo's are ordered to be preserved till the
appeal period is over and if the appeal is preferred
then the disposal of Mos shall follow the orders of the
Appellate Court.
SC No. 1108/2013

If the appeal is not preferred and after appeal
period is over all the Mos shall be destroyed as
worthless.

The Bail bonds and surety bonds furnished
u/sec. 437A of Cr.P.C. by accused No.2 Prabhakar
C.K. will be in force for a period of 6 months from the
date of this order in view of sec. 437A of Cr.PC.

Posted to hear regarding imposition of sentence
against accused No.1 B.M.Chandrashekar @
Chandru.

(Dictated to the Judgment writer on computer, corrected, signed
and then pronounced by me in the open court on this the 23rd day
of February, 2021.)

(Gururaj Somakkalavar)
LXIX Addl.C.C. & Sessions Judge,
Bengaluru.

Dt: 24.2.2021

ORDER REGARDING SENTENCE

The accused No.1 and his counsel are heard on the
question of sentence. The accused No.1 submitted his submission
that he is aged 62 years and he is an ex serviceman. He further
submits that he was not present on the crime spot on the date of
incident. Further he also submits that the deceased Preethy
Acharya filed two false complaints against him on false allegations.
He further submits that during the Government service he got
married and he looked after the deceased. From that period there
are false allegations against him by the deceased Preethy
Acharya. Further he pleads that he is a musician and also a
SC No. 1108/2013

music teacher. Further he submits that, he is also conducting
music classes and teaching music in the central prison during his
stay in judicial custody as UTP. He further submits that he has
been in the judicial custody since from 8 years. He submits that he
is innocent and has not committed any offence alleged against
him. He submits that a lenient view may please be taken while
imposing sentence on him.

The counsel for the accused also addressed argument on
the sentence. Counsel for the accused No.1 submits that the
present case is not one of the rarest of the rare case and
considering the facts and circumstances a lenient view may be
taken. Having regard to the facts and circumstances the accused
is not liable for capital punishment. The counsel for the accused
No.1 relied upon 3 authorities. He has relied upon; I. 2006(92)
DRJ 720 (DB) in case of
State of Delhi vs. Brij Kishore
, ii. (2019) 4
SCC 522 in case of
Digamber Vaishnav and another vs. State of
Chhattisgarh
and iii.

(2002) 3 SCC 76 in case of
Lehna vs. State of
Haryana
. He has pointing at the citations and the authorities of the
Hon`ble Apex Court and High Court of Delhi. It is pointed out that
merely there are large number of wounds on the persons of
deceased it could not fall in the rarest of the rare case.

He further
relied upon the observation of the Hon`ble Supreme Court in

Lehna
case. He submits that quoting from the observation of
Hon`ble Apex Court life imprisonment is the rule and death is an
exception. Death sentence must be imposed only when life
imprisonment appears to be an altogether in adequate punishment
having regard to the relevant circumstances of the crime, and
provided, and only provided the option to impose sentence of
SC No. 1108/2013

imprisonment for life cannot be conscientiously exercising having
regard to the nature and circumstances of the crime and all the
relevant circumstances. Relying on the observation of the Hon`ble
Higher Courts the counsel for the accused No.1 submits that a
lenient view may be taken while imposing sentence against
accused No.1.

Per contra learned P.P. submits that there are two women
were murdered by brutally assaulting on them. The said crime
comes under rarest of the rare case. It is further submitted by the
prosecution that the two deceased having three children. The
deceased Preethy Acharya had two children and deceased Veda
had one child. Their lives are spoiled due to the act of accused
No.1. It is submitted that there are virtually three deaths on the
death of two women. It is further argued that life imprisonment is
the lesser punishment to the crime committed by accused No.1.
That accused No.1 deserves to be imposed with capital
punishment for the offence u/sec. 302 of
IPC
.

Heard both sides on the sentence. The accused is in judicial
custody. He is in jail for about 7 yers and 317 days from the date of
his arrest. Though accused No.1 claims to be innocent. Having
discussed the evidence on record thoroughly this court is of the
view that accused No.1 is guilty of the offence u/sec. 302 of
IPC
.
Now having regard to the facts and circumstances of this case this
is not the rarest of the rare case so that death sentence can be
imposed on the accused No.1.

However considering the facts and circumstances of the
case the offence involves murder of two woman having minor
children, they were murdered by gruesomely assaulting on their
SC No. 1108/2013

head and left them to die. The offence is very heinous in nature.
By the act of accused No.1 two lives have been taken out this is
the case of double murder. Considering the facts and
circumstances of the case the accused No.1 shall undergo life
imprisonment. Life means his remaining life. However the crime
does not comes under the purview of rarest of the rare case. The
Hon`ble Apex Court as relied by the counsel for accused No.1 has
observed that life imprisonment is a rule and death sentence is an
exception. As stated above it is not a rarest of the rare case
warranting capital punishment. According to the sentencing
scheme found in
section 302
of IPC if death sentence cannot be
awarded the accused should be sentenced with imprisonment for
life and fine. Keeping in mind the interest of the State as well of the
accused No.1 this court is of the opinion that the ends of the
justice will be served if the accused No.1 is imposed rigorous
imprisonment for life and fine of Rs. 25,000/- for the offence u/sec.
302 of
IPC
and in default of payment of fine, he has to further
undergo simple imprisonment for one year.

The case filled with affliction and agony. As because here,
in this case a aged mother lost her daughter. Two children of
deceased Preethy Acharya lost their mother. Another child of
deceased Veda lost her mother. The children are minors who
have lost their mother, her love and affection, the care and
concern. The mother of Pretthy Acharya has lost her daughter, her
care. All these a sorrowful states cannot be filled by any means.
Definitely not by the monetary support. No amount will be
sufficient for compensating their pain and agony, the loss they
have gone through. However a compensation has to be awarded
SC No. 1108/2013

to them to give a little support in their upcoming life.
Section 357(3)

of Cr.P.C. provides for awarding compensation. Hence this court is
of the opinion that the apart from the fine imposed on the accused
No.1, under the facts and circumstances of the case an amount of
Rs. 1,00,000/- is to be awarded as compensation under
Sec. 357
(3)
of Cr.P.C. The compensation amount of Rs. 1,00,000/- shall
be paid towards the compensation to the mother of Preethy
Acharya i.e. Geetha Acharya and two children of Preethy Acharya
Purvi and Pallavi and among the said compensation an amount
also to be paid to the child of Veda.

Further I am of the opinion that the compensation awarded
under
Sec. 357
of Cr.P.C. to the victims may not be adequate,
hence recommendation needs to be made to DLSA, Bengaluru for
consideration of award of compensation to the victim herein under
the Victim Compensation Scheme as provided under
Sec. 7
of the
Victim Compensation Scheme, 2011. Accordingly office is directed
to send a copy of this judgment to the Hon`ble President of DLSA,
Bengaluru for consideration of award to the victims herein, under
the Victim Compensation Scheme, 2011 alongwith a covering
letter in this regard. Therefore I proceed to pass the following;

ORDER

Acting under
Section 235(2)
of Cr.P.C. the accused
No.1 B.M.Chandrasekhar @ Chandru is sentenced to
undergo rigorous imprisonment for life and pay fine of Rs.
25,000/-. In default of payment of fine he shall under go
further simple imprisonment for one year, for the offence
u/sec. 302 of
IPC
.

Acting u/ Section 357(3) Cr.P.C it is ordered that the
SC No. 1108/2013

accused No.1 shall pay compensation of Rs. 1,00,000/- to
the victims i.e. the mother of deceased Preethy Acharya
and two children of Preethy Acharya and child of deceased
Veda, towards compensation, if this amount remained
unpaid it shall be recovered from the accused No.1 or from
his property according to Section 431 of Cr.P.C.

Office is directed to furnish free copy of the judgment
to the accused forthwith.

Send conviction warrant accordingly.

Office is directed to send a copy of this judgment to
the Hon`ble President of DLSA, Bengaluru for consideration
of award to the victims herein, under the Victim
Compensation Scheme, 2011 alongwith a covering letter
in this regard.

(Dictated to the Judgment writer on computer, corrected, signed
and then pronounced by me in the open court on this the 24 th
day of February, 2021.)

(Gururaj Somakallavar)
LXIX Addl.C.C. & Sessions Judge,
Bengaluru.

ANNEXURE

LIST OF WITNESSES EXAMINED FOR PROSECUTION:

PW 1 Geetha Purushotham Acharya
PW 2 Manjunath B.V.
PW 3 Dherendra
PW 4 Shri Latha
PW 5 H.S. Nityanandamurthy
PW 6 S.R. Puttabhimachar
SC No. 1108/2013

PW 7 Mahesh
PW 8 Babitha
PW9 Anil Kumar
PW 10 Nethra
PW 11 Sudha Prasanna
PW 12 B.S. Chandrashekar
PW 13 Sudharshan N Akki
PW 14 K. Subramani
PW 15 Umashankar Murthy
PW 16 Dr. Gayathreedevi B
PW 17 Santhosh
PW 18 D. Suresh
PW 19 K.R. Prakash
PW 20 K. Krishnayya
PW 21 Amitha
PW 22 Girish
PW 23 B.P. Nataraj
PW 24 Premavathi
PW 25 P. Basavaraju
PW 26 Dr. Naveen Kumar
PW 27 V. Muniyappa
PW 28 Raghavendra
PW 29 B.S. Srinivas
PW 30 Dr. Chandrashekar

LIST OF DOCUMENTS EXHIBITED FOR PROSECUTION:

Ex.P.1 Complaint
Ex.P.2 Spot mahazar
Ex.P.3 to 10 8 Photos
Ex.P.11 Running Panchaname
Ex.P12 Statement of PW.1
Ex.P.13 Statement of PW.1
Ex.P14 FIR
Ex.P 15 FIR
Ex.P.16 & 17 Charge Sheet
Ex.P.18 Seizer Mahazer
Ex.P.19 Marriage Registration Certificate
Ex.P. 20 Statement of PW.4
Ex.P.21 Portion of Statement of PW.5
Ex.P.22 Statement U.sec 161(3) of PW.6
Ex.P.23 Statement of PW.8
SC No. 1108/2013

Ex.P.24 Statement of PW.9
Ex.P.25 Statement of PW.10
Ex.P.26 Letter
Ex.P.27 Copy of TC
Ex.P.28 Statement
Ex.P.29 Letter regarding Sketch of Spot
Ex.P.30 Sketch
Ex.P.31 Office Letter
Ex.P.32 Report
Ex.P.33 Letter
Ex.P.34 Report of PW.18
Ex.P.35 & 36 Acknowledgement
Ex.P.37 Pass Port
Ex.P.38 Report of PW.19
Ex.P.39 Report of PW.20
Ex.P.40 FIR
Ex.P.41 Inquest Report
Ex.P.42 Inquest Mahazer
Ex.P.43 Notice
Ex.P.44 Statement of PW.24
Ex.P.45 Statement of PW.25
Ex.P.46 Requestion Letter
Ex.P.47 & 48 PM report
Ex.P.49 Report
Ex.P.50 PM report
Ex.P.51 Report
Ex.P.52 Requisition
Ex.P.53 Report
Ex.P.54 Sample Seal
Ex.P.55 Requisition
Ex.P.56 Copy of Report
Ex.P.57 Report of PW.28
Ex.P.58 Requisition Letter
Ex.P.59 Voluntary Statement of A1
60 AND 61 FSL Report
Ex.P.62 Sample Seal

LIST OF MATERIAL OBJECTS MARKED FOR PROSECUTION:

MO-1 & 2 Sample Blood
MO-3 & 4 2 Blood Stained Pillows
MO-5 to 6 2 Boxes
SC No. 1108/2013

MO-7 Draught Beer Box
MO-8 Blood Stained Petty Coat
MO-9 Blood Stained Nighty
MO-10 Blood Stained Underwear
MO-11 Blood Stained Petty Coat
MO-12 Blood Stained Nighty
MO-13 Block Colour Track Pant
MO-14 Blood Stained Shirt
MO-15 Blood Stained Rod

LIST OF WITNESSES EXAMINED FOR ACCUSED: NIL

LIST OF DOCUMENTS EXHIBITED AND MOS MARKED FOR
ACCUSED; NIL

(Gururaj Somakkalavar)
LXIX Addl.C.C. & Sessions Judge,
Bengaluru.
SC No. 1108/2013

23.2.2021.

State by PP
A1 and A2 JC
By Sri SB
for judgment.

Judgment pronounced in open court, vide
separate order;

ORDER

In exercise of power vested with this Court
U/
Sec.235(2)
of Criminal Procedure Code, the
accused No.1 B.M.Chandrasekhar @ Chandru s/o
late Manjunath is convicted for the offence punishable
u/sec. 302 of
IPC
.

In exercise of power vested with this Court
U/
Sec.235 (1)
of Criminal Procedure Code, the
accused No.1 B.M.Chandrasekhar @ Chandru s/o
late Manjunath is acquitted for the offence punishable
u/sec. 109, 120(B) r/w 34 of
IPC
.

In exercise of power vested with this Court
U/
Sec.235 (1)
of Criminal Procedure Code, the
accused No.2 Prabhakar C.K. is acquitted for the
offence punishable u/sec. 302,109,120(B) r/w 34 of

IPC
.

Accused No.2 is set at liberty if he is not
required in any other case.

Having regard to the nature of the offence, it is
not a fit case to extend the benefit of P.O. Act to
accused No.1.

The Mo's are ordered to be preserved till the
appeal period is over and if the appeal is preferred
SC No. 1108/2013

then the disposal of Mos shall follow the orders of the
Appellate Court.

If the appeal is not preferred and after appeal
period is over all the Mos shall be destroyed as
worthless.

The Bail bonds and surety bonds furnished
u/sec. 437A of Cr.P.C. by accused No.2 Prabhakar
C.K. will be in force for a period of 6 months from the
date of this order in view of sec. 437A of Cr.PC.

Posted to hear regarding imposition of sentence
against accused No.1 B.M.Chandrashekar @
Chandru.

(Gururaj Somakkalavar)
LXIX Addl.C.C. & Sessions Judge,
Bengaluru.

Accused No.1 and 2 produced from J.C. Accused No.1
and his counsel ready to address argument on
sentence. Accused No.1 submitted his argument on the
imposition of sentence. Counsel for accused No.1 also
addressed argument on imposition of sentence. Further
prosecution addressed argument on the sentence. Heard
both side on the imposition of sentence. For orders on
sentence, call on 24.2.2021.

LXIX Addl.C.C. & Sessions Judge,
Bengaluru.