Bangalore District Court

State By Karnataka vs Mahesh on 4 September, 2020

IN THE COURT OF LXXI ADDL. CITY CIVIL & SESSIONS
JUDGE, BENGALURU CITY (CCH-72)

DATED THIS THE 4 th DAY OF SEPTEMBER, 2020

PRESENT

Smt. SANDHYA.S, M.A., LL.B. (spl.)
LXXI Addl. City Civil & Sessions Judge, Bengaluru.

S.C.No.825/2014

Complainant State by Karnataka
Kamakshipalya P S,
Bengaluru.

(By the learned
Public Prosecutor)
Accused Mahesh,
S/o. Nagaraj,
Aged about 35 years,
R/at No.605, 9th 'A'
Cross, 2nd Mainroad,
Agraharadasarahalli,
Bangalore - 79.

(Sri.N.Prashant,
Advocate)

Date of offence 01.05.2014
Date of report of offence 01.05.2014
Name of the complainant Smt.Bhagyamma
Date of commencement of 22.07.2015
recording of evidence
Date of closing of evidence 07.02.2020
2 S.C.No.825/2014

Offences complained of
Sec.498A
,
of
Indian Penal Code
Opinion of the Judge Accused not found
guilty
State represented by Learned Public
Prosecutor
Accused persons defended Sri.N.Prashant,
by Advocate.

JU DG M E NT

This case is the result of charge sheet filed by the

complainant Police, Kamakshipalya Police Station against

the accused for the offence punishable under

Section.498A
and
of Indian Penal Code.

2. The factual matrix of the prosecution case is that

the complainant C.W.1, Smt. Bhagyamma, who is mother

of the deceased Divya, registered the case against the

accused as per Cr.No.220/2014 for the offence punishable

U/s. 498A, 306 of
Indian Penal Code
. After completion of

investigation the charge sheet was filed against the

accused, for the offence punishable U/s. 498A, 306 of

Indian Penal Code
. Further it is alleged that the deceased

Divya was staying along with the accused after the
3 S.C.No.825/2014

marriage. That the accused had lost money in Travels

business and had made heavy loans and was not looking

after the necessities of the deceased and her son. That

the accused used to pick up quarrel with the deceased

stating that just because theirs was a love marriage, his

relatives are not in touch with him and was telling the

deceased to take poison or hang herself and die. That on

01.05.2014 at 10.45 to 11.00 a.m in the house of

accused, the deceased had committed suicide by tying

saree to the roof angle top by hanging herself. Hence, the

accused abetted the deceased to commit suicide by

subjecting her to physical and mental cruelty, instigating

her to die and thereby the accused committed the offence

as alleged, is the case of the prosecution.

3. As discussed herein above, on the complaint of

C.W.1, Bhagyamma, the mother of the deceased, the

complainant police registered this case and after

completion of investigation, filed charge sheet against the
4 S.C.No.825/2014

accused before the learned Magistrate. At the initial stage

the accused was arrested and later was released on bail.

4. In pursuance of service of summons, the accused

appeared through his counsel before the learned

Magistrate and got enlarged on bail. The learned

Magistrate furnished copy of charge sheet to the accused

and hence, the provision of
Sec.207
of Cr.P.C. was

complied with. As the offence charge-sheeted against the

accused is exclusively triable by the sessions court, the

learned Magistrate acting under
section 209
of Cr.P.C. has

committed this case to Hon'ble Principal District and

Sessions Court, Bengaluru and later Hon'ble Principal

District and Sessions Court has sent this case to this

Court for trial and hence, the matter is taken up before

this Court accordingly for further proceedings. The

accused was already on bail and later was present before

this court.

5. My predecessor had framed charges against the

accused for the offence punishable under
section 498A
,
S.C.No.825/2014

306 of
Indian Penal Code
, on 28.11.2014, to which

accused has pleaded not guilty and thereby he has

claimed to be tried of the said offences.

6. In support of the case of prosecution out of the

19 witness cited in the charge sheet 10 witnesses are

examined by the prosecution, as P.W.1 to P.W.10. The

prosecution has got marked 11 documents at Ex.P.1 to

Ex.P.11 and one Material Object was marked as M.O.No.1.

After closing the evidence of prosecution, this Court has

recorded the statement of accused under
section 313
of

Cr.P.C, for which the accused has denied the

incriminating materials forthcoming against him in the

evidence of prosecution witnesses as false. Further the

accused has chosen to submit evidence on his behalf

and got examined as D.W.1 and also got marked one

document which is marked as Ex.D.1.

7. Heard the argument of the learned Public

Prosecutor, that in all, 10 witness have been examined

and 11 exhibits marked and one material objects also
6 S.C.No.825/2014

marked. That the portion of P.W.1 will count for 304B,

that there is injury on the neck of the victim. That the

victim had problem. The sequence of eivdence, changing

of residence, not able to work, so demanded dowry shows

the act of the accused. That P.W.1 is the mother of

C.W.11 and 12. P.W.1 has mentioned that her daughter

was not taken care of. That women is mother of house,

she has to be taken care of. That the case against the

accused is proved beyond reasonable doubt and hence,

the accused be convicted for the offences charged is the

argument of the Learned Public Prosecutor.

8. Heard the argument of the defence counsel,

Sri.N.Prashant, Advocate, who has vehemently argued

that C.W.4 turned hostile, C.W.10, 8, 5, 11, 12, 16, 18 are

given up. C.W.13 and 14 are eye witnesses. C.W.13 is

given up and C.W.14 has turned hostile. C.W.16 is Doctor,

C.W.7,8 and 9 are blood relatives. That the marriage of

accused and the deceased was a love marriage. This

marriage was inter-caste marriage. That regarding loan

there is no wisper in the complaint and Investigating
7 S.C.No.825/2014

Officer has not made proper investigation and added

their names. That the deposition of P.W.5 cannot be

trusted. P.W.3 is the sister. That the deceased had made

loan and so the accused is innocent. Mahajar and post-

mortem are not proved. That the deceased had a traveling

agency. The material object is mentioned as saree but one

veil is produced as M.O and if the material object is

irrelevant, then conviction can not be granted. That one

child was born and now is with the accused. That if 498A

of
IPC
is not proved then 306 of
IPC
cannot be said to be

proved. That the ingredient of sec 306 of
Indian Penal

Code
is not proved and prosecution has failed to prove the

case beyond all reasonable doubt. That the deposition

does not bring in ambit of
Section 498A
,
of I.P.C and

hence the accused be acquitted is the argument of the

counsel for the accused.

9. Perused all the oral and documentary evidence on

record. Now the points that arise for my consideration are:

1.
Whether the prosecution proves
beyond all reasonable doubt that the
accused gave physical and mental

8 S.C.No.825/2014

harassment to deceased after the
marriage and thereby the accused has
committed the offence punishable
u/sec. 498A of
IPC
?

2. Whether the prosecution further
proves beyond all reasonable doubt that
the deceased without bearing with the
ill-treatment and harassment on
01.05.2014 in between 10.45 to 11.00
p.m in the house of accused, had
committed suicide by hanging to the
roof top angle with saree and accused
abetted the deceased to commit suicide
and thereby the accused has committed
the offence punishable under
Section
of IPC?

3. What order?

10. After hearing the arguments of both the parties

and on considering all the oral and all the documentary

evidence on record, my findings on the above points are as

hereunder:

Point No.1 : In the negative
Point No.2 : In the negative
Point No.3 : As per final order
for the following:

:R E A S O N S:

11. Points No.1 and 2: The points no. 1 and 2 are

taken up together as they are related to each other and to

9 S.C.No.825/2014

avoid repetition in the discussion. As stated herein above,

it is not in dispute that the complainant C.W.1

Bhagyamma, is the mother of the deceased Divya and also

that accused is the husband of the deceased.

12. The offence charged against the accused is

Under
Section 498A
and
of Indian Penal Code.

Hence, unless the prosecution proves beyond all

reasonable doubt that when the deceased was residing

with the accused , the accused instigated the deceased to

die and thereby the accused subjected the deceased to

physical and mental cruelty, thereafter without bearing

such ill-treatment by the accused, the deceased

committed suicide by tying a saree to the roof top angle,

no case can be made out against the accused for the

offence charged. In this background, the evidence

forthcoming from the prosecution should be considered

for proving the offences charged against the accused.

13. As stated herein above, the prosecution was set

into motion against the accused on the complaint of

10 S.C.No.825/2014

C.W.1, Smt.Bhagyamma, the mother of the deceased,

registered the case against the accused as per

Cr.No.220/2014 for the offence punishable under
Section

498A
and
of Indian Penal Code. After completion of

investigation the charge sheet was filed against the

accused for the offence punishable under
Section 498A

and
of Indian Penal Code. Hence, the accused abetted

the deceased to commit suicide by subjecting her to

physical and mental cruelty instigating her to die and

thereby the accused committed the offence as alleged, is

the case of the prosecution.

14. The legal position assigned for the offence

falling under
Section 498A
and
of Indian Penal Code

has to be looked into. Bearing in mind the above said

legal position, I have perused the evidence on record to

find out whether the prosecution has proved the charges

leveled against the accused.

15. On going through the evidence adduced by the

prosecution witness, it reveals that P.W.1 is complainant,

11 S.C.No.825/2014

one Smt. Bhagyamma, who is the mother of the deceased

divya. She states that C.W.9, 11 and 12 are her children.

That the deceased divya is her 6th daughter. That the

deceased and the accused are husband and wife and their

marriage was solemnized at Dharmastala, later there was

reception at shivasagar hotel at double road. That they

were staying in a rented house in Girinagara. That

whenever her daughter came home, she was crying. That

the accused was forcing her to bring money from her

parents house. That the witness had borrowed from her

relatives and given the accused about four and a half

lakh. But even then the accused did not take care of her.

Later they started to stay at vijayanagara and then at

Kamashipalaya and later at Dasarahalli. That later she

came to know about the death of the deceased and they

went and saw that her daughter had hanged and

committed suicide. That she gave the complaint, which is

marked as Ex.P.1 and the witness signature is marked as

Ex.P.1(a). That the police had drawn the mahazar and the

dead body of the deceased was sent to Victoria hospital.

12 S.C.No.825/2014

That the accused was not paying the rent of the house

and also he was not doing any work.

16. During the cross-examination of P.W.1, she

admitted the suggestion that the marriage of the deceased

with the accused is an inter-caste marriage. That in there

family there was no inter-caste marriage. This witness

admitted that there was opposition by the family members

for the inter-caste marriage. That the accused belonged

to scheduled caste is admitted by the witness. That the

mother of the witness by name Paapamma, was taking

care of her and was fostering her. That the deceased was

telling the matters of her life with the mother of the

witness. That the house of the deceased from Dasarahalli

to her house was about 7 to 8 kilometers far. That the

witness is working as maid and earning around

Rs.1,500/-. That she spends the money on her daughter's

and grandchildren. That she works for 2 hours in the

house of other people. That she has taken loan from

Suguna, Mahesh, Amool, Ramanna, Jagga, Ravikumar

and Paapamma. That her mother had given her younger

13 S.C.No.825/2014

sisiter's golden chain and ear rings to the deceased. That

the same is not mentioned in the complaint. That the

people who gave loan were calling her on phone and

asking her repay the loan. That no body had given her

any trouble. That she came to know about the death of

the daughter at about 10.30 a.m and at about 11.00 a.m

they came near the house of the accused. That about

1.30 p.m they went to the police station and the police

wrote down what she told them. That she has signed in

the complaint and that the police have not inserted

anything other than she told them in the complaint. That

she did not get the complaint read out about the matter in

it. That who wrote the complaint exactly is not know to

her. That she has not given any complaint against this

accused prior to this complaint. That the deceased has

not given any complaint against the accused to the police.

That the accused would not consume alcohol and smoke

that she would come to know. That the marriage of the

deceased and the accused was a love marriage. That the

marriage relationship between the two was not at all

14 S.C.No.825/2014

cordial. That whenever she went to the house of the

accused, her daughter would be sad. That there were

injuries on the body of the deceased. That there was

wound on the cheek. That in order to reach the house of

the accused, she taken around one hour time. That

before she could reach, the neighbors had already

informed the police. This witness has denied other

suggestion put to her by the defense counsel.

17. On considering the papers on record and the

evidence adduced by P.W.1, it is relevant to note that as

extracted from the deposition,

"ಸಸಗಸಣ, ಮಹಹಶ‍, ಅಮಸಲ, ರಮಣಣ, ಜಗಗ,
ರವಕಸಮರ, ಪಪಮ ಮ ಇವರರದ ಸಲ ಪಡದದವ."

Further that:

"ದದರನಲರಸವ ವಷಯಗಳನಸ ನ ನನಸ ಒದ
ಲ
ತಳದಸಕದರಡಲ. ಸಕಯಸ ಪನನ ಹಹಳ‍ಸತತಳ ದದರನಸ ನ
ಯರಸ ಬರದರಸ ಅನಸ ನ ವದಸ ನನಗ ನಖರವಗ ಗದತತಲಲ.

ಈ ಫಟನಗರತ ಮಸರಚ ನನಸ ಪಹಲಸರಗ ಆರದಹಪಯ
ವರಸದದ ಯವದಹ ದದರಸ ಕದಟಟಲಲ. ನನನ ಮಗಳಸ
ಆರದಹಪಯಸ ಅವಳಗ ಕರಸಕಸಳ ಕದಡಸತತದದ ಬಗಗ
ಯವದಹ ದದರನಸ ನ ಪಲಹಸರಗ ಕದಟಟಲಲ."

The reading of the complaint reveals that the

complainant had given around four and a half lakh to the

15 S.C.No.825/2014

accused and also that accused was not doing any work

and deceased was working. P.W.1, being the complainant

and mother of the deceased Divya, has also stated that

whenever her daughter came home, she was crying. Also

that P.W.1 had borrowed from her relatives and given the

accused about four and a half lakh. That she has taken

loan from Suguna, Mahesh, Amool, Ramanna, Jagga,

Ravikumar and Paapamma. None of these persons are

made as witness in this case to substantiate their say of

P.W1. Further, there are no document to show the loan

transaction was made by her for an amount of four and a

half lakh. Further her mother had given her younger

sister's golden chain and ear rings to the deceased and

the same is not mentioned in the complaint, goes to show

that the version of this witness cannot be believed in toto

unless supported by other material witness. Further the

witness during the cross-examination states that she did

not get the complaint read out from the writer and prior to

this complaint there was no other complaint registered

against this accused by the complainant or the deceased,

16 S.C.No.825/2014

also creates doubt in the case of the prosecution. Further

there are no documents, to show the monetary

transaction between the accused and the deceased or the

complainant and the accused, to support the case of the

prosecution. The men's-rea for driving the deceased to

commit suicide has to established by the evidence of the

material witness and corroborated. Hence, the evidence of

the complainant has to be corroborated with the evidence

of the other material witnesses to prove the charges

framed against the accused and the abatement of the

accused has to be proved to establish the case of the

prosecution.

18. Further, the spot pancha witness is examined is

P.W.8, who is C.W.3, one by name Lokesh. He worked

in garage and he states that from last 20 years he is

residing at Kamakshipalya. That Kamakshipalya police

have not called him to do mahazar and no mahazar has

been made in his presence. That he identified the

signature on the spot mahazar which is marked as Ex.P5

and his signature as Ex.P5(a). That he does not know

17 S.C.No.825/2014

what is written in panchanama and stated that 2 years

ago when he visited the police station he had signed. This

witness turned hostile and at this juncture the Learned

Public Prosecutor was permitted to cross-examine this

witness. This witness has denied the suggestion put to

him by the Learned Public Prosecutor. Hence the only one

spot pancha witness, who was examined by the

prosecution, has turned hostile and not at all supported

the case of the prosecution. This witness was not of any

help to the prosecution.

19. Further, Inquest panchanama witnesses are

PW.2, P.W.3, P.W.4 and P.W.7. Among them, P.W.2 is

C.W.6, one by name Prabhakar, who is working as coolie.

He states that on 03.04.2014 the dead body of deceased

was kept in the Victoria Hospital mortuary, at that time

the police have taken his signature and another person

has also signed in the panchanama. That the said

panchanama is marked as Ex.P.2 and the signature of the

witness is marked as Ex.P.2(a). That there was a wound

near the neck of the deceased.

18 S.C.No.825/2014

20. During the cross-examination he states that

the mother of the deceased is residing in his neighbor.

That the police have not given any written notice. That he

is the native of mysore. That he works in a place called

Adugodi. That he works in shifts from afternoon 2.00 to

night 10.00p.m. That he has signed the panchanama at

the time of inquest and has not read the panchanama.

That police asked him to sign on the pachanama and he

has signed. That he has not observed the jewels on the

body and does not know to which direction dead body was

placed. That the said panchanama is marked as Ex.P.2

and police has taken his signature and another person.

That other than wound near the neck of the deceased, he

has not observed any other wound. That he has signed

the inquest at the time of inquest and has not read it. On

considering the evidence of P.W.2, although the witness

has signed the inquest, he stating that he has not read it,

creates doubt on the case of the prosecution. Further,

because the police told him to sing he has signed also

creates doubt on the case of the prosecution.

19 S.C.No.825/2014

21. Another inquest pancha is P.W.3, who is C.W 7,

one by name Manjula, who is sister of the deceased who

has given the statement to the thasildaar during the

inquest. She states that accused is her deceased sister's

husband. That the marriage of the accused and deceased

took place at Dharmasthala on 31.05.2010 and were

staying in Girinagar. That after the marriage accused

used to harass the deceased to get money from her

parents house and the mother and brother of the

deceased had taken loan and given to the accused. That

accused and the deceased has personally gone and

collected the amount from Suguna and her sister. That

accused used to harass the deceased stating that after

marrying her he lost everything and to go and die. That

accused was not going to work properly and was not

providing basic necessities to the family or paying rent

and hence accused and deceased used to take loan from

others. That the deceased used to tell everything to the

witness through telephone and when deceased visited

20 S.C.No.825/2014

their house. That on 01.05.2014 the deceased hanged

herself in the house of the accused and the deceased

brother Venkatesh informed the same to the witness.

That when witness and her husband went to the place,

accused was there at home and the deceased had hanged

herself with a veil and the same has been told in front of

Thasildar.

22. During the cross-examination of P.W.3, she

states that the house of the accused is 2 to 3 kilometers

far from her house and if traveled in vehicle, one could

reach the accused's house in 15 to 20 minutes. That her

deceased sister and accused were in love with each other

for 1 to 2 years and later got inter-caste marriage. That

she has not given any document related to their marriage

to the I.O. That the deceased and accused stayed at

rented house for about 7 months in Vijaynagar and later

at Dasarahalli where the deceased committed suicide.

That the accused used to harass the deceased and there

was no complaint given against him to the police. That

the witness was working on contract basis as computer

21 S.C.No.825/2014

operator and working hours was from 10.00 a.m to 5.30

p.m. That the accused and the deceased have made loans

nearly 4 to 5 lakhs. That they might have received

amount of Rs.2,25,000/- from Suguna, Rs.75,000/- from

Amala. That the mother of the witness and aunty has

given gold ornaments, her grandmother has given

Rs.50,000/- along with one pair earrings to the deceased

and the accused. That the persons who had given money

used to telephone the deceased and ask for amount and

the deceased used to take time to return the said amount.

That the deceased used to discuss everything with her

grandmother. That the brother of this witness informed at

11.00 a.m and she came with her husband at 11.15 to the

house of the accused. That the police took accused and

this witness statement has been recorded at Victoria

hospital. That this witness denied all other suggestions

put to her by the defense counsel.

23. On considering the papers on record and the

evidence adduced by P.W.3, it is relevant to note that as

extracted from the deposition,

22 S.C.No.825/2014

" ಆರದಹಪ ಮತಸತ ನನನ ತರಗ ತಗದಸಕದರಡರಸವ ಸಲ
ಅರದಜಸ 4-5 ಲಕ ಆಗರಬಹಸದಸ. ಸಸಗಸಣ ಇವಳಸ
2,25,000/- ಸಲ ಕದಟಟ ರಬಹಸದಸ, ಅಮಲ ಇವಳಸ
75,000/- ಸಲವನಸ
ನ ಆರದಹಪಗ ಕದಟಟರಬಹಸದಸ.

further that:

"ಸಲ ಕದಟಟವರಸ ದವವ ಇವಳಗ ಫಹನ‍ ಮಡ
ಸಲವನಸ ನ ಮರಸಪವತ ಮಡಸವರತ ಕಹಳಸತತದದರಸ.
ಸಲ ಮರಸಪವತ ಮಡದ ಕರಣದರದ ನನನ ತರಗ
ಮನಸಸ ಗ ನದಹವಗತಸತ. ನನನ ತರಗ ಅವಳಗಹನದರದ
ಕಷಟ ಆದರ ನನನ ಅಜಜಯ ಹತತರ ಹಹಳಸತತದದಳಸ.

On considering the depositions of P.W.3, who is the

sister, she states that the deceased had made loan and

the people who gave loan were asking her to repay the

same and deceased used to take time to repay. Whereas

the mother of the deceased who is P.W.1 has mentioned in

her deposition that people who gave loan to deceased, no

body had given her any trouble. The deposition of the

P.W.1 and P.W.3 are not same. Further, P.W.3 mentioning

that due to the reason of repayment of loan the deceased

was upset has to be considered here. Although there is

loan made by and the people were telephoning the

deceased to return it, now the question is whether the

23 S.C.No.825/2014

accused had abetted the same and what is the role of this

accused in the abatement to commit suicide.

24. Further another inquest pancha is P.W.4, who is

C.W.4, one by name Vajramuni residing at Tilaknagara.

He is the House owner, he states that the deceased and

the accused were staying as tenant in his building. That

nearly one year back the police have taken the signature

of his and another person on the inquest, in Victoria

Hospital mortuary and the said panchanama is marked as

Ex.P.2 and the signature of the witness is marked as

Ex.P.2(b). He states that there was a wound near the

neck of the deceased.

25. During the cross-examination of P.W.4, he

states that he stays at Bannerghatta, SRK Garden, he

goes to work at 6.00a.m and return home at 9 or

10.00p.m. That the police have not given any written

notice to attend panchanama. That he denied that police

has not done panchanama in front of him. That he was

informed that the deceased had committed suicide and he

24 S.C.No.825/2014

has signed the panchanama. This witness denied other

suggestion put to him by the defence counsel. On

considering the depositions of this witness and the

inquest, An inquest is an inquiry into the circumstances

surrounding a death. This witness was again not of much

help to the case of the Prosecution, as nothing much

incriminating was elicited by the mouth of this witness.

26. Further P.W.7, who is C.W.15, one by name

Gopalaswamy. He is the Retired Thasildaar who has

conducted the inquest proceedings. He states that from

30.09.2013, he is working as Special Thasildar, Bangalore

North Taluk. That on 01.05.2014 he received request

letter to inquest the body of the deceased Divya, W/o

Mahesh, from Kamakshipalya Police Station. That the

request letter has been marked as Ex.P4 and the

signature of the witness is marked as Ex.P4(a). That he

conducted the inquest at Victoria Hospital on 02.05.2014

from 9.00 to 11.30a.m in front of witnesses Vajramuni,

E.Mahesh and P.Prabhakar. That during the inquest it

25 S.C.No.825/2014

was found that there was nearly 9 inch ligature mark on

the neck of the deceased from left ear to right ear. That

during the inquest, P.W.3, Manjula has given statement to

this witness that due to the dowry harassment by the

accused the deceased had committed suicide. That

Inquest report has been marked as Ex.P2 and signature of

the witness is marked as Ex.P2(c).

27. During the cross-examination of P.W.7, he has

stated that he does not know the color of the ligature

mark but the ligature mark was 1 ½ to 2 inch in width.

That during the inquest the relatives of the deceased were

present and he has not recorded the statements of other

relatives of the deceased, as there was no necessity for the

same. He stated that the head of the deceased was placed

towards the east and legs towards the west. This witness

stated that he cannot mention the check-bandi of the

place of inquest. Further, that there were no other marks

found on the body and also there were no ornaments on

the body. That he conducted the inquest at Victoria

hospital from 9.00 to 11.30p.m. That he does not know

26 S.C.No.825/2014

who has sent the Ex.P4, requisition letter and he has

received Ex.P4 after signing. The witness denied the

suggestion that he has not gone to victoria hospital and

conducted inquest as per Ex.P2 and denied other

suggestion put by the defense counsel. He stated that he

does not remember which type of cloth was there on the

body of the deceased. That the deceased was of dark

complexion and tongue was protruding out. That the

photos of the dead body was not taken because he did not

find it necessary. On considering the depositions of P.W7

and the relevant papers on record, it goes to show that he

is the Thashidaar, who has conducted the inquest

proceeding. This witness stated that he cannot mention

the check-bandi of the place of inquest. Further, that

there were no other marks found on the body and also

there were no ornaments on the body. He stated that he

does not remember which type of cloth was there on the

body of the deceased can be noted here. Further, it is

relevant to note that the evidence of public servants

cannot be disbelieved that they are interested in the

27 S.C.No.825/2014

success of the prosecution. But based only on the

evidence of this witness alone, the guilt of the accused

cannot be concluded.

28. Other witnesses are P.W.5, P.W.6. Among them, P.W.5

is C.W.9, one by name Venkatesh. He is the brother of the

deceased and states that P.W.1 is his mother and P.W.8 is

his brother and accused is the husband of his deceased

sister Divya. That the marriage of the accused and

deceased took place at Dharmasthala on 31.05.2010 and

were staying at Girinagar and now at Dasarahalli. That

accused was not working anywhere and used to harass

his deceased sister. That accused used to send the

deceased to her parents house to get money every month.

That accused was not providing basic necessities to the

family, paying rent. That on 01.05.2014 at 11.30 a.m

accused telephoned witness and informed that deceased

hanged herself. That when witness visited that house of

the accused his sister had committed suicide by hanging

herself.

28 S.C.No.825/2014

29. During the cross-examination P.W5, he states

that he works at BTM Layout and his work is from

9.30a.m to evening 5.30p.m. That after the marriage the

deceased and the accused were staying in Girinagar for 6

months and 3 years at Dasarahalli. That he does not

know whether his deceased sister had filed maintenance

case against the accused. That the accused had told this

witness that he was working at Tours and Travels and

earning Rs.20,000/- per month. That when he visited the

deceased house at 11.30a.m the accused was present in

the house and was talking to someone on the mobile.

That the police came and took the accused on the

complaint of the house owner. Further that the deceased

had informed this witness about the harassment given to

her and the same has been told in front of the police.

That the deceased and the accused are of different caste

and this witness does not know how many years they were

in love before marriage. That the accused and deceased

have visited the house of the witness nearly 20 times.

Further he denied all other suggestions put to him.

29 S.C.No.825/2014

30. On considering the papers on record and the

evidence adduced by P.W.5, it is relevant to note that as

extracted from the deposition,

"ಆರದಹಪಯಸ ಟದರಸ‍ ಮತಸತ ಟಟವಹವಸನಲ ಕಲಸ ಮಡಸತತದದ.

ಪಹಲಸರಸ ಘಟನ ಸದಳಕಕ ಬರದಸ ಆರದಹಪಯನಸ ನ
ಕರದಸಕದರಡಸ ಹದಹದರಸ. ಮನಯ ಮಲಹಕ
ಪಹಲಸರಗ ದದರಸ ಕದಟಟದದ."

Further that,

"ನನನ ತರಗ ದವವ ಚಕಕವಳಗನರದ ಅವಳ ಅಜಜಯ ಮನಯಲ
ಬಳದದದಳಸ. ಆಕಯಸ ಎಲ ಲ ವಷಯಗಳನಸ ನ ತನನ ಅಜಜಯ

ಹತತರ ಹಹಳಸತತದದಳ‍ಸ. ಅದಹ ರಹತ ಅಜಜಗದ ಸಹ ದವವಳ ಮಹಲ
ಪಟಹತ ಇತಸತ."

This witness stating that the deceased was close to

the grandmother and she was telling everything to her but

grandmother is not made witness by witness, creates

doubt on the case of the prosecution. Further, the

evidence of this witness has to be corroborated with the

evidence of other witnesses. Nothing much incriminating

was elicited by the mouth of this witness.

31. Further, P.W.6 is C.W.14, one by name

Ramappa. Who is the house owner and resides in

30 S.C.No.825/2014

Dasarahalli. He states that his house is at Dasarahalli

and has given 4 houses for rent. That the accused and

his deceased wife were staying on the first floor of his

building for 3 to 4 months. That he does not know about

the relationship between the accused and the deceased

and does not know the reason for the deceased to commit

suicide and has not given any statement in front of the

police. This witness turned hostile and at this juncture

Learned Public Prosecutor was permitted to cross-

examine this witness. This witness has denied the

suggestion put to him by the Learned Public Prosecutor.

On considering the deposition of this witness and the

statement, it goes to show that he has not deposed

anything as per the statement and turned hostile thereby

benefiting the accused on the other hand. Further, he

being an independent witness and also the house owner,

has not at all supported the case of the prosecution. This

witness was not of much help to the prosecution.

32. Further, Police witnesses are P.W.9 and P.W.10.

Among them P.W.9 is C.W.17, one by name Rajanna. He

31 S.C.No.825/2014

is working as Head Constable. He states that he is

working in Kamakshipalya Police station since 4 years.

That on 02.05.2014 in Kamakshipalya Crime

No.220/2014, on the order of the I.O he has taken the

dead body of the deceased to Victoria hospital and got

done the post mortem and later handed over the dead

body to the brother of the deceased and collected the

acknowledgment.

33. During the cross-examination this witness has stated

that there was ligature mark around the neck and he does

not know the measurement of the same. Nothing much

incriminating was elicited by the mouth of this witness.

Hence, it cannot be said that the charges framed on the

accused can be proved by the evidence of this witness

alone.

34. Further, the Investigating Officer is P.W.10, who

is C.W.19, one by name Boraiah D.B. He states that he

was working as SI at Kamakshipalya Police Station during

the year 2014 to May 2015. That on 01.05.2014, he

received complaint from P.W.1. That he filed registered

32 S.C.No.825/2014

the complaint
u/s.306
of Indian Penal Code in Crime

No.220/2014. That the said complaint is marked as

Ex.P1 and his signature as Ex.P1(b). FIR is at Ex.P6 and

the signature is marked as Ex.P6(a). That when he visited

the spot, P.W.1 was present there and he drew

pachanama in the presence of panchas which is at Ex.P5

and his signature is at Ex.P5(b). That he sent requisition

to the Thasildaar and the dead body was sent to victoria

hospital. That later after conducting the inquest and post

mortem the body was handed over to the family. The

saree used to commit suicide was red and cement colour

and the same was handed over by P.W.9 and the same is

inserted in P.F.No.95/2014. That the said P.F is marked

as Ex.P7. That the accused was arrested on 02.05.2014

and produced before the Hon'ble court. That on

02.05.2014 C.W.13, 14, 8, 9, 10, 11 &12 statements were

recorded. That on 20.05.2014 P.C. 6408 brought post

mortem report which is at Ex.P8 and Ex.P8(a) is witness

signature. That the saree used by the deceased Divya is

marked as M.O.1 and the marriage invitation is marked as

33 S.C.No.825/2014

Ex.P9, Ex.P10 & Ex.P11 are photographs. That after

completion of the investigation he has submitted the

charge sheet.

35. During the cross-examination, P.W.10 states

that he has not taken women PC during the panchanama.

But at the time of panchanama women PC was not at that

spot. That women PC by name Smt.Rekha Devi is

working in his concerned police station. That during the

panchanama women constable was present. That her

signature is not taken on the panchanama and he had no

hindrance to take her signature. That the said women PC

is not shown as witness in the charge sheet. Witness

states that the complaint was written by the complainant.

That he did not come to know what work the deceased

was doing and he did not investigate in that regard. The

witness admitted the suggestion that in the complaint and

marriage invitation card the places shown is different. To

the suggestion put by the defence counsel witness states

he does not know whether the dates are also shown

different. That he has not issued any notice to Dinesh

34 S.C.No.825/2014

and Lokesh before going to spot mahazar in order to do

the spot mahazar. That the witnesses were present at the

spot. That he had taken the photographer to take the

photos. That he does not remember the color of the bed.

That he has called the witnesses to the station and taken

the statement and they all were called on the same day.

This witness denied other suggestions put to him. That

the deceased has used saree to commit suicide but he

cannot say the measurement and he has not mentioned it.

That he cannot say who got the dead body down. The

witness admitted the suggestion that after detaching the

dead body, saree was cut into two pieces and the same is

produced. That he has not mentioned the measurement of

the two pieces of the saree which was cut. That no

photographs were taken after the body was detached from

the hanging position. This witness admitted the

suggestion that the photographer is not made a witness.

The witness admitted the suggestion that as per law the

photographer has to made a witness but he was not made

so. That he has mentioned that the private parts of the

35 S.C.No.825/2014

deceased were intact. That saree is usually 6 meters in

length and not 9 meters. The saree measurement is not

taken by him. This witness denied other suggestions put

to him.

36. On considering the papers on record and the

evidence adduced by P.W.10, it is relevant to note that as

extracted from the deposition,

"ಯವ ಕರಣಕಕ ಮಮತಳಸ ತಹರಕದರಡಳಸ
ಎರಬಸದನಸ
ನ ತಳದಸಕದಳಸಳ ವ ಸಲಸವಗ ಮಮತಳಸ ಯವ
ಕಲಸ ಮಡಸತತದದಳಸ ಎರದಸ ನನಸ ತಳದಸಕದಳಳಬಹಕಗತಸತ
ಎರದರ ಸರಯಲಲ."

"ಪರಚನಮ ಮಡಲಸ ನನಸ ಮಹಳ ಪಹದಯನಸ ನ
ನನನ ಜದತ ಕರದಸಕದರಡಸ ಹದಹಗರಲಲಲ. ಸದರ
ಪರಚನಮ ಮಡಸವಗ ಮಹಳ ಪಹದ ಹಜರದದರಸ
ಎರದರ ನಜ."

Further that,

ದ ,
" ಮಮತ ದವವ ಸಹರಯರದ ನಹಣ‍ಸ ಬಗದಸಕದರಡದಸ
ಅದರ ಅಳತಯನಸ ನ ನನಸ ಹಹಳಲಸ ಆಗಸವದಲಲ ಮತಸತ
ನ ನಮದದಸ ಮಡಲಲ ಎರದರ ಸರ."

ಅದನಸ

Further that,

"ಶವವನಸನ ನಹಣಸ ಬಗದ ಸಸತಯರದ ಸಹರಯನಸ ನ
ದ , ಅದರ ಎರಡದ ಭಗಗಳನಸ
ಕತತರಸ ಇಳಸದಸ ನ ಹಜರಸ
ಮಡದವ ಎರದರ ಸರ. ಕನದನಸ ಪ ಟಕರವಗ
ಫಹಟದಹ ನ ಸಕ ಮಡಬಹಕಗತಸತ, ಆದರ
ತಗದವರನಸ

36 S.C.No.825/2014

ಮಡಲಲ, ಅವರನಸ ನ ಸಕಯನನಗ ಮಡಲಸ ತದರದರ
ಇರಲಲಲ ಎರದರ ಸರ."

On considering the evidence of P.W.10, it is evident

to note that, this witness being the Investigating Officer,

has not at all investigated about what work deceased was

doing, the evidence of public servants cannot be

disbelieved that they are interested in the success of the

prosecution. But based only on the evidence of this

witness, the guilt of the accused persons cannot be

concluded.

37. After closing of the prosecution side witness,

the accused has entered the witness box and given his

evidence. The defence witness is accused himself who is

D.W.1 by name Mahesh. He states that he is working as

a coolie. That the deceased Divya was his wife. That their

marriage was a love marriage and inter-caste marriage

and was solemnized on 30.5.2010 at Dharmastala. That

the family members of the deceased did not come to the

weeding as they did not like the same. That after the

marriage he was residing at Vijayanagara. That they were

37 S.C.No.825/2014

living cordially. That the deceased was grown along with

her grandmother Smt.Paapamma. That he has a boy born

out of the marriage relationship. That he is earning what

is sufficient to his life. That his wife had a desire to start

a travelling agency. That because of which even when he

rejected it, she had made loan from others. That the said

traveling agency is in the name of the deceased as 'Divya

Travels'. That there was no profit from the agency. The

people who had given loan were pressurizing her to return

the money, so the deceased was felling very sad. That the

deceased was mentioning that she will not be alive. That

he used to console her. That on the day of the death,

there was naming ceremony of the son of accued and he

had been to the shop to bring items. That when he came

back, the door was closed and he had knocked. That on

seeing from the window the deceased had hanged herself.

That he informed the brother of the deceased by name

Sunil. The permit of the traveling agency is marked as

Ex.D.1. That the reason behind her death are the people

who gave the loan and forcing her. That because he got

38 S.C.No.825/2014

inter-caste marriage and he belongs to scheduled caste, a

false complaint has been lodged on him. That his son by

name Chiranjeevi, is in his care. That he is not related to

this case.

38. During the cross-examination of D.W.1 by the

Learned Public Prosecutor, he states that he saw the

deceased in one wedding of his friend and then they fell in

love and later got married. That only one brother Sunil,

had come to their wedding. That the parents of the

deceased were not interested in this wedding. That he

had told about his caste. That the deceased had made

around three lakh loan for the traveling agency. That

there was no profit out of it. That he was earning around

twenty thousand income. That he used to give all the

money to the deceased. This witness admitted the

suggestion that he is not having the details of the loan

made and no documents is given. That the deceased had

made loan after the marriage with him. This witness

admitted the suggestion that if any loan is to be made,

deceased has to ask him and then do the loan. Further

39 S.C.No.825/2014

admitted that the deceased had told about the loan to the

accused. That how much loan was told to him and he

had said no to it. That how much profit would be earned

was not told to me. This witness admitted the suggestion

that if how much loan is made, how much profit is

received is not known to him. That the deceased had told

him that she will repay the loan amount and he need not

worry about it. That when the people who gave the loan

were asking the repayment, they had told that they will

repay little by little. That when he would be in the house,

the people who gave loan were calling the deceased on

phone and harassing her. That other then him, no one

has heard about the harassment given by the people over

phone for repayment. That on the day of the incident, the

naming ceremony of his son was scheduled. That the

deceased had joy about the birth of the son. That the

deceased had no any worry about the family matters. The

witness admitted the suggestion that no witness had come

to the court in order to say about the harassment given by

40 S.C.No.825/2014

the people who gave loan. This witness has denied other

suggestions put to him by the Learned Public Prosecutor.

39. On considering the deposition and the relevant

papers on record of D.W.1, it goes to show that he is the

husband and accused in this case. Further that the

deceased was running a 'traveling agency' which was in

her name. The document Ex.D.1 which is Permit in

respect of a contract carriage issued by the Regional

Transport Authority, Bangaluru. It is in her name and is

the permit to one motor cab with 5 passengers capacity

issued on 26.5.2011, about three years prior to the death

of the deceased. Further, he is not having the details of

the loan made and no documents is given again raises

doubt. The prosecution was not successful to elicite

anything much incriminating in the case. The fact that no

person who gave loan, is made a witness in this case

raises doubt about the case of the prosecution.

40. Further the counsel for accused has produced

decisions reported in:

41 S.C.No.825/2014

(a) In Crl.A.No.1567/2007 (Kantilal Martaji Pandor
vs. State of Gujurat & Anr.

" She had decided to jump into the well
leaving the child and accused behind,
therefore the act of the suicide appears
to be intentional act to get rid of the
frequent insult, ignorance and
exploitation."

The Hon'ble High Court in the present
case has already held that the appellant
was not guilty of abetting the suicide of
the deceased and was therefore not
guilty of the offense under
Sec.306

Indian Penal Code.

This finding of the Hon'ble High Court
was based on the evidence of the father,
mother, sister and another relative of the
deceased who deposed on the basis of
inter alia. In this case there is no
evidence of any physical harm having
been caused by the appellant to the
deceased nor any acts of mental cruelty
committed by him. Hence the appellant
cannot be held guilty of any cruelty
within the meaning of clause (a) of the
Explanation under
Sec.498A
Indian
Penal Code. In the result, we set aside
the impugned judgment of the High
Court of and acquit the appellant of the
charge under
Sec.498A
, IPC. Since the
appellant is on bail, his bails bonds be
discharged.

(b) In Crl.A.No.985/2004 (
Atmaram vs. State of
Maharashtra
). Held:

42 S.C.No.825/2014

" She submitted that the post mortem
report of the deceased purnabai does not
show any injury on her body and it also
shows that she had her meals. That the
doctor had described purnabai as well
nourished and the last meal appears to
have been taken by her. Moreover the
post-mortem examination report does not
show that the purnabai was subjected to
any severe beating before her death."

"Such a consequence from mental state
of purnabai cannot be ground for holding
that the appellant was guilty of cruelty
within the meaning of clause(a) of the
explanation to
Sec.498A
IPC. We therefore
hold that the presumption under
Sec.113A is not attracted and the
appellant cannot also be held guilty of
abetting the suicide of purnabai."

" The court should be extremely careful
in assessing the facts and circumstances
of each case and the evidence adduced in
the trial for the purpose of finding
whether the cruelty meted out to the
victim had in fact induced her to end the
life by committing suicide. If it transpires
to the court that a victim committing
suicide was hypersensitive to ordinary
petulance, discord and differences were
not expected to induce a similarly
circumstanced individual in a given
society to commit suicide, the conscience
of the court should not be satisfied for
basing a finding that the accused charged
of abetting the offense of suicide should
be found guilty."

43 S.C.No.825/2014

"For the aforesaid reasons, we allow this
appeal and set aside the impugned
judgment of the High Court and the
judgments of the trial court holding
appellant guilty of the offences under

Sec.306
and
498A
, IPC and direct that the
bail bonds executed by the appellant be
discharged."

(c) In 2002 (3) SCR 376 (
Giridhar Shankar Tawade
vs. State of Maharashtra
), held:

" This by itself would not bring home the
charge under
Sec.498A
. Demand for
dowry has not seen the light of the day."

But some cogent evidence is required
to bring home the charge of
Sec.498A
as
well without which the charge cannot be
said to be maintained.

(d) In (
Aravind Singh vs. State of Bihar
),
(Jaginder singh vs. State of Hariyana).

"That there is no sufficient evidence the
dowry demand for less the evidence of
cruelty available in record. No outside
person has been called to give evidence.
On the wake of the aforesaid, charge under

Sec.498A
also cannot be sustained. Both
the learned trial Judge and the High Court
are clearly wrong in not considering this
aspect of the matter and thus fell into a
serious and clear error. In that view of the
matter the conviction and sentence stand
set aside'

44 S.C.No.825/2014

The above decisions of their Lordships, with due

respect to their Lordship, are in favour of this accused.

41. The Ex.P.8 is the post mortem report, it is evident

that no other injuries are seen on the body of the

deceased except the ligature mark and opinion of the

Doctor, in the post mortem report mentions "Death was

due to Asphyxia as a result of hanging". P.W.1

deposed that there were injuries on the body of the

deceased and that there was wound on the cheek. But

45 S.C.No.825/2014

the Postmortem report does not mention it . Further the

in the inquest P.W.7, the Thasildaar has not told any

thing in this regard. P.W.2 and P.W.4 also mentioned

same. Hence, the say of P.W.1 cannot be believed in toto.

Further, that there are not other injury marks on the

body of the deceased is taken note of which goes to show

that there were no physical harm being caused to the

deceased. So the prosecution has to prove the abatement

of the accused in this case and the ill treatment meted to

the deceased by the accused. Hence, entire material of the

prosecution has to be considered and to prove the charges

laid against the accused as per
section 498A
and
of

Indian Penal Code. Based only on the evidence of P.W.1,

P.W.3, P.W.5 and P.W.8, who are family members of the

deceased, mother, sister and brothers, the conclusion

cannot be drawn for the charges levied against the

accused. P.W.1 deposed around four and a half lakh was

given to the accused and that he was not doing any work

and deceased was working, But the Investigating Officer,

has not shone any progress in this area during the

46 S.C.No.825/2014

investigation and deposed the same during the cross-

examination. Further, without the documentary evidence

available about the loan transaction and nor any person

who gave loan examined by the prosecution, it creates

doubt on the case of the prosecution. P.W.8 who is the

spot pancha witness, the only one spot pancha witness

examined by the prosecution has turned hostile and not

at all supported the case of the prosecution. P.W.2 who is

the inquest panchanama witness, deposed that though

he as signed the panchanama, he has not read the same

and police asked him to sign so he signed, this again

raises doubt on the case of the prosecution. P.W.3 who is

the sister deposed that accused used to harass the

deceased and there was no complaint given against him to

police is taken note of. Further P.W.3 deposed that

accused and deceased might have received an amount of

Rs.2,25,000/- from Suguna and Rs.75,000/- from Amala,

shows that she is not sure of it. Further without any

documentary or any witness who gave loan being

examined, it creates doubt on the case of the prosecution.

47 S.C.No.825/2014

Further, P.W.3 deposed that deceased used to discuss

everything with her grandmother, and the said

grandmother not being examined, creates doubt on the

case of the prosecution. It can be noted that P.W.6, who

is house owner, an independent witness, has turned

hostile and deposed that he does not know about the

relationship between the accused and the deceased,

further, he does not know the reason the deceased

committed suicide, this also creates doubt on the version

of the prosecution. P.W.10 who is the Investigating Officer,

has deposed that in the complaint and the marriage

invitation card the places show is different. P.W.1, P.W.2

and P.W.5 the maternal family members of the deceased

deposed that the marriage of the deceased with the

accused was arranged on 31.5.2010. But on perusal of

Ex.P. 9 the marriage was held on 30.5.2010 and D.W.1

has mentioned it correct. The spot mahajar witness has

not supported the case of the prosecution. It is evident to

note that the spot panchanama which is at Ex.P.5 is not

supported by the Mahazar witness. But the say of the

48 S.C.No.825/2014

witness has to be corroborated to the evidence adduced by

other witness. Here in this case the prosecution was not

successful to establish the charges framed against the

accused. The ingredient of
section 498A
and
of I.P.C

are not proved by the prosecution beyond all reasonable

doubt. Thus it is clear that the P.W.1, who is mother of

the deceased, only suspected about the accused that the

deceased would have committed suicide due to ill-treated

by the accused. Therefore, on considering the entire

evidence and papers on record, there is absolutely no

material against the accused to prove that the accused

subjected the deceased to any kind of ill-treatment and

harassment and thereby due to any such ill-treatment

and the harassment, the deceased committed suicide.

Hence, the question of accused abetting the deceased to

commit suicide does not arise. Moreover, prosecution is

not able to explain why pancha witness P.W.8 and

independent witness/house owner P.W.6 have turned

hostile. P.W.1 being mother of the deceased, without the

support of any evidence of independent witnesses, the

49 S.C.No.825/2014

evidence of P.W.1 does not merit consideration as the

P.W.6 and P.W.8 have turned hostile. There is absolutely

no material forthcoming in the evidence of P.W.2, P.W.3,

P.W.4 and P.W.7 to prove the inquest which is at Ex.P.2.

More over the Inquest panchanama at Ex.P.2 is not

supported by any of the independent witnesses. None of

the independent witness have given their evidence in

favour of the prosecution and in turn supported the

accused to get the benefit of doubt. P.W.7 and 10 are the

official witness and based only on the evidence of this

witness alone, charges cannot be proved.

42. Hence, from the discussion made herein above,

the Investigation Officer has not gone ahead to show what

progress was made with regard to the investigation in

identifying persons who had given the loan to the

deceased. Further he has not made the investigation

about what work the deceased was doing prior to her

death. This raises doubt on the case of the prosecution.

Further the document Ex.D.1, which is the produced by

50 S.C.No.825/2014

the defense counsel goes to show that there was a motor

cab permit availed by the deceased. But, this aspect was

dropped by the Investigating Officer during the

investigation as admitted by him during the cross-

examination. The depositions of P.W.2, 4, 6, 7, 9 do not

bring out anything much incriminating against the

accused. The say of the witness has to be corroborated to

the evidence adduced by other witness. Here in this case

the prosecution was not successful to establish the

charges framed against the accused under
section 498A

and
of Indian Penal Code. Even the owner of the

house, has turned hostile and not adduced in the favour

of the prosecution. The ingredient of
section 498A
and
of I.P.C are not proved by the prosecution beyond all

reasonable doubt, that the accused abetted the

commission of suicide. The fact that the marriage of the

deceased and the accused was a result of love and was

inter-caste marriage is admitted by witness and the

accused. And the fact that none of the family members of

the deceased attended the wedding, shows that all was

51 S.C.No.825/2014

not right in the relationship of the deceased family and

the accused during the marriage. The independent

witnesses have turned hostile to the case of prosecution.

The inquest panchanama at Ex.P.2 and the spot mahazar

at Ex.P.5 are not proved by the prosecution by

examination of the concerned witnesses. Only on the

basis of evidence of Investigating Officer, P.W.10, no case

can be made out against the accused for the offence

charged. Therefore, doubt arises regarding the case

alleged against the accused. It is well settled principle of

law that the accused is entitled to the benefit of such

doubt. Hence, the prosecution has utterly failed to prove

beyond all reasonable doubt that the accused subjected

the deceased to any physical and mental harassment or

cruelty and that the accused abetted the deceased to

commit suicide. Consequently, the prosecution has failed

to prove point No.1and 2, and therefore, the point No.1

and 2 are answered in the Negative.

43. Point No.3: From the discussion made herein

above, it is clear that the accused deserves to be acquitted

52 S.C.No.825/2014

of the offence charged against him in this case. In the

result, therefore, I proceed to pass the following:

OR D E R

Acting under
Section 235(1)
of
Cr.P.C. the accused is hereby acquitted of
the offences punishable under
Section
498A
and
of Indian Penal Code.
The bail bond executed by the
accused and the surety bond shall stand
canceled.

The property/saree at M.O.1 is
ordered to be destroyed after expiry of
appeal period as it is worthless.

(Dictated to Stenographer directly on the computer, corrected by me and then
pronounced in open Court on this the 4th day of September, 2020)

(Smt. SANDHYA S.)
LXXI Addl. City Civil & Sessions Judge,
Bengaluru (CCH-72)

ANNEXURE

List of Witnesses examined on behalf of Prosecution:

P.W.1 : Bhagyamma
P.W.2 : Prabhakar
P.W.3 : Manjula
P.W.4 : Vajramuni
P.W.5 : Venkatesh

53 S.C.No.825/2014

P.W.6 : Ramappa
P.W.7 : Gopalaswamy
P.W.8 : Lokesh
P.W.9 : Rajanna
P.W.10 : Boraiah D.B

List of Documents exhibited on behalf of Prosecution:

Ex.P.1 : Complaint
Ex.P.1(a & b) : Signatures of witness
Ex.P.2 : Death investigation report

Ex.P.2(a,b & c) : Signatures of witnesses
Ex.P.3 : Statement of Ramappa
Ex.P.4 : Request letter
Ex.P.5 : Panchanama
Ex.P5(a & b) : Signatures of the witnesses
Ex.P.6 : FIR
Ex.P.6(a) : Signature of the witness
Ex.P.7 : Property list
Ex.P.8 : Postmortem report
Ex.P.8(a) : Signature of witness
Ex.P.9 : Marriage Invitation Card
Ex.P.10& 11 : Photos

List of Witnesses examined on behalf of accused:

D.W.1 - Mahesh

54 S.C.No.825/2014

List of Documents exhibited on behalf of accused:

Ex.D.1 - Permit in respect of a contract Carriage.

List of Material Objects marked on behalf of
Prosecution:

M.O.1 - Saree.

(Smt. SANDHYA S.)
LXXI Addl. City Civil & Sessions Judge,
Bengaluru (CCH-72).