Gujarat High Court

Narendrasinh Ramuji Vaghela & 2 vs State Of Gujarat & on 13 November, 2014

Author:
J.B.Pardiwala

Bench:
J.B.Pardiwala

R/CR.MA/10161/2014 CAV JUDGMENT

IN THE HIGH COURT OF GUJARAT AT AHMEDABAD

CRIMINAL MISC.APPLICATION (FOR QUASHING & SET ASIDE
FIR/ORDER) NO. 10161 of 2014

FOR APPROVAL AND SIGNATURE:

HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE J.B.PARDIWALA

================================================================
1 Whether Reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the judgment ?

2 To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3 Whether their Lordships wish to see the fair copy of the judgment ?

4 Whether this case involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution of
India, 1950 or any order made thereunder ?

5 Whether it is to be circulated to the civil judge ?

================================================================
NARENDRASINH RAMUJI VAGHELA & 2....Applicant(s)
Versus
STATE OF GUJARAT & 1....Respondent(s)
================================================================
Appearance:
MR DEVDIP BRAHMBHATT, ADVOCATE for the Applicant(s) No. 1 - 3
MR H A SHAH, ADVOCATE for the Respondent(s) No. 2
MS MEENA VYAS, ADVOCATE for the Respondent(s) No. 2
MS HANSA PUNANI, ADDL.PUBLIC PROSECUTOR for the Respondent(s) No. 1
================================================================

CORAM: HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE J.B.PARDIWALA

Date :13/11/2014

CAV JUDGMENT

1. Rule.   Ms. Hansa Punani, the learned A.P.P. waives service of Notice of
rule for and on behalf of the respondent no.1 State and Miss Meena Vyas, the
learned   Advocate   appearing   on   behalf   of   respondent   no.2   waives   served   of
notice of rule.

Page 1 of 15

R/CR.MA/10161/2014 CAV JUDGMENT

2. By this application under
section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
(for short "the Code"), the petitioners original accused persons seek  to invoke
the inherent powers of this court praying for quashing of the First Information
Report   being   C.R.No.II­276/2014   registered   with   'A'   Dvn.   Police   Station   of
Mehsana for the offence punishable under Section 498­A r/w
sec. 114
of the
Indian Penal Code and
Sections 3
and
of the Dowry (Prohibition) Act.

3. The case made­out by the respondent no.2, original informant, in the
First Information Report may be summarized as under:­

3.1 The petitioner no.1 is the elder brother of the husband of the respondent
no.2 (Jeth).  The petitioner no.2 is the wife of the petitioner no.1 (Jethani) and
the petitioner no.3 is the sister­in­law of the respondent no.2 (husband's sister).
It is the case of the respondent no.2 that her marriage was solemnized about 1
½ years before the date of lodging of the FIR with Ramuji Pratapji - son of
Hirendrasinh according to the customs and rituals prevailing in the community.
It is stated that after marriage she started residing at her matrimonial home
along with her mother­in­law, namely, Dhirajba and her father­in­law,namely,
Hirendrasinh and her husband Ramuji at the Santram Bungalows.  It is further
stated that the marital life initially was quite happy and peaceful, but shortly
thereafter her mother­in­law, father­in­law and her husband started harassing
her and pressurized her to get Rs.1.5 lac and some silver ornaments from her
parental home.  It is further stated that the husband, mother­in­law and father­
in­law had made it very clear that they would permit the respondent no.2 to
return to her matrimonial home only if she would get some cash and ornaments
towards dowry.  It is further stated that with a view to see that her matrimonial
life   does  not   get   jeopardized   the  respondent  no.2   continued   to   tolerate  the
harassment at the end of her husband, father­in­law and mother­in­law. She has
further stated that one day after picking­up quarrel she was driven­out of her
matrimonial home and she had to go back to her parental home.   In the last
para of the FIR she has further stated that the accused persons herein used to

Page 2 of 15

R/CR.MA/10161/2014 CAV JUDGMENT

instigate  her  husband  and  in­laws.    She  has  further  stated  that  the  accused
persons had also joined in coercing her to get dowry from her parental home.
This is the sum and substance of the short First Information Report lodged by
the respondentno.2 dated 19/5/2014.

4. Mr.Brahmbhatt,   the   learned   advocate   appearing   on   behalf   of   the
petitioners   vehemently   submitted   that   the   petitioners   herein   are   residing
separately and have nothing to do with the matrimonial life of the respondent
no.2.  Mr. Brahmbhatt submits that the house of the petitioners nos.1 and 2 is
almost at a distance of 5 kms. from the matrimonial home of the respondent
no.2 and the petitioner no.2 is married and living at her matrimonial home.  He
submits that even if the entire case of the respondent no.2 is accepted as true,
the same fails to disclose commission of any cognizable offence not to speak of
the offence under Sec. 498­A of the
I.P.C
. and Sections­3 and 7 of the
Dowry
(Prohibition)  Act
.   Mr.   Brahmbhatt,   therefore,   prays   that   continuation  of   the
police investigation on the strength of such a frivolous first information report
would be nothing but an abuse of process of law.

5. On the other hand Miss. Meena Vyas, the learned Advocate appearing on
behalf of respondent no.2 has vehemently opposed this application submitting
that the plain reading of the FIR discloses commission of the cognizable offences
and the police should be permitted to complete the investigation. Miss. Vyas
submits that whether the allegations leveled in the FIR are true or false is not for
this court to decide at this stage.  Miss Vyas therefore, prays that there being no
merit in this application, the same may be rejected.

6. Ms.   Hansa   Punani,   the   learned   A.P.P.   appearing   on   behalf   of   the
respondent   no.1   State   of   Gujarat   has   also   opposed   this   application   and
submitted that the petition deserves to be rejected and the police should be
permitted to go ahead with the investigation.

7. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having

Page 3 of 15

R/CR.MA/10161/2014 CAV JUDGMENT

gone   through   the   materials   on   record,   the   only   question   that   falls   for   my
consideration is whether the First Information Report deserves to be quashed.

8. It is not in dispute that the three petitioners before me are not residing
jointly i.e. at the matrimonial home of the respondent  no.2.   The petitioner
nos.1 and 2 are the husband and wife and are residing separately at the address
shown in the cause title of the petition, whereas the respondent no.2 i.e. the
sister of respondent no.2's husband, is a married lady and residing at her own
matrimonial home.

9. This  is  one  more  case  of   roping  all  the  family  members  in  a  dispute
essentially   between   the   husband   and   wife.     It   is   very   easy   to   level   such
allegations.   I   find   the   allegations   in   the   First   Informatin   Report   too   vague,
general and sweeping, specifying no instances of criminal conduct.   The case
made­out by the respondent no.2 at best, may disclose some case against her
husband and in­laws because even according to her own  admission she was
residing   along   with   them   at   her   matrimonial   home.     However,   the   three
petitioners,  in  my  view,  have  nothing  to   do  so  far  as  the  issue  of  dowry  is
concerned.  The petitioner nos.1 and 2 are living their own life and are residing
separately, whereas the petitioner no.3 is also living her own life along with her
husband at a different place. Why should they insist for dowry and how are they
concerned with the dowry.

10. I may quote with profit a decision of the Supreme Court in the case of

G.V.   Rao   Vs.   L.H.V   Prasad
and   ors.   reported   in   (2000)   3   SCC   693,   more
particularly the observations made by the Court in para 12, which reads thus:­

"12.  There has been an outburst of matrimonial disputes in recent times.
Marriage is a sacred ceremony, the main purpose of which is to enable the
young   couple   to   settle   down   in   life   and   live   peacefully.     But   little
matrimonial   skirmishes   suddenly   erupt   which   often   assume   serious
proportions resulting in commission of heinous crimes in which elders of
the family  are also involved  with the result  that those  who could  have
counselled   and   brought   about   rapproachment   are   rendered   helpless   on

Page 4 of 15

R/CR.MA/10161/2014 CAV JUDGMENT

their being arrayed as accused in the criminal case.  There are many other
reasons   which   need   not   be   mentioned   here   for   not   encouraging
matrimonial litigation so that the parties may ponder over their defaults
and   terminate   their   disputes   amicably   by   mutual   agreement   instead  of
fighting it out in a court of law where it takes years and years to conclude
and  in that process  the parties  lose their "young"  days  in chasing  their
"cases" in different courts."

11. In my view, this petition is squarely covered by the judgment and order
dated 26th  September, 2014 passed in Criminal Misc. Application No.5819 of
2009 by this court itself.  The relevant portion reads as under:­

"21. A plain reading of the FIR and the charge­sheet papers reveal that
the allegations levelled by the respondent No.2 are quite vague, general
and sweeping, specifying no instances of criminal conduct.  Although the
respondent   No.2   is   much   more   annoyed   with   her   husband,   with   an
obvious motive, has arrayed all the close relatives of her husband in the
FIR.    The Police also seems to have recorded stereo­type statements of
the witnesses who are none other than the parents and other relatives of
the respondent No.2 and has filed a charge­sheet.   If a person is made to
face a criminal trial  on some general and sweeping allegations without
bringing   on   record   any   specific   instances   of   criminal   conduct,   it   is
nothing but abuse of process of the Court.   The Court owes a duty to
subject the allegations levelled in the complaint to a thorough scrutiny to
find out prima­facie whether there is any grain of truth in the allegations
or whether they are made only with the sole object of involving certain
individuals  in  a  criminal  charge.    To  prevent  abuse  of  process  of  the
Court, and to save the innocent from false prosecutions at the hands of
unscrupulous litigants, the criminal proceedings, even if they are at the
stage of framing of the charge, if they appear to be frivolous and false,
should be quashed at the threshold.

22.
In
Preeti Gupta Vs. State of Jharkhand
, reported in 2010 Criminal
Law Journal 4303(1), the Supreme Court observed the following:­

"28.   It   is   a   matter   of   common   knowledge   that   unfortunately
matrimonial litigation is rapidly increasing in our country. All the
courts   in   our   country   including   this   court   are   flooded   with
matrimonial cases. This clearly demonstrates discontent and unrest
in the family life of a large number of people of the society.

29.  The  courts  are receiving  a large  number  of  cases  emanating
from section 498­A of the
Indian Penal Code
which reads as under :

"498­A. Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her
to   cruelty.­Whoever,   being   the   husband   or   the   relative   of   the

Page 5 of 15

R/CR.MA/10161/2014 CAV JUDGMENT

husband   of   a   woman,   subjects   such   woman   to   cruelty   shall   be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years and shall also be liable to fine.

Explanation.­ For the purposes of this section, 'cruelty' means :

(a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive
the woman to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to
life, limb or health (whether mental or physical) of the woman; or

(b)  harassment  of  the woman   where   such   harassment   is with  a
view   to   coercing   her   or   any   person   related   to   her   to   meet   any
unlawful   demand  for  any  property  or   valuable  security  or  is  on
account of failure by her or any person related to her to meet such
demand."

30.   It   is   a   matter   of   common   experience   that   most   of   these
complaints   under   section   498­A
IPC
are  filed  in  the   heat   of  the
moment over trivial issues without proper deliberations. We come
across a large number of such complaints which are not even bona
fide   and   are   filed   with   oblique   motive.   At   the   same   time,   rapid
increase in the number of genuine cases of dowry harassment are
also a matter of serious concern.

31.The   learned   members   of   the   Bar   have   enormous   social
responsibility   and   obligation   to   ensure   that   the   social   fiber   of
family   life   is   not   ruined   or   demolished.   They   must   ensure   that
exaggerated versions of small incidents should not be reflected in
the criminal complaints. Majority of the complaints are filed either
on their advice or with their concurrence. The learned members of
the Bar who belong to a noble profession must maintain its noble
traditions and should treat every complaint under section 498­A as
a basic human problem and must make serious endeavour to help
the parties  in arriving  at an amicable  resolution  of that human
problem.   They   must   discharge   their   duties   to   the   best   of   their
abilities  to ensure that social fiber, peace and  tranquillity of the
society remains intact. The members of the Bar should also ensure
that one complaint should not lead to multiple cases.

32.   Unfortunately,   at   the   time   of   filing   of   the   complaint   the
implications  and consequences  are not properly visualized  by the
complainant   that   such   complaint   can   lead   to   insurmountable
harassment, agony and pain to the complainant, accused and his
close relations.

33. The ultimate object of justice is to find out the truth and punish
the   guilty   and   protect   the   innocent.   To   find   out   the   truth   is   a

Page 6 of 15

R/CR.MA/10161/2014 CAV JUDGMENT

herculean   task   in   majority   of   these   complaints.   The   tendency   of
implicating   husband   and   all   his   immediate   relations   is   also   not
uncommon. At times, even after the conclusion of criminal trial, it
is   difficult   to   ascertain   the   real   truth.   The   courts   have   to   be
extremely   careful   and   cautious   in   dealing   with   these   complaints
and must take pragmatic realities into consideration while dealing
with matrimonial cases. The allegations of harassment of husband's
close   relations   who   had   been   living   in   different   cities   and   never
visited   or  rarely   visited  the  place   where   the  complainant   resided
would have an entirely different complexion. The allegations of the
complaint   are   required   to   be   scrutinized   with   great   care   and
circumspection.   Experience   reveals   that   long   and   protracted
criminal   trials   lead   to   rancour,   acrimony   and   bitterness   in   the
relationship  amongst  the  parties.  It  is also  a  matter  of  common
knowledge that in cases filed by the complainant if the husband or
the husband's relations had to remain in jail even for a few days, it
would   ruin   the   chances   of   amicable   settlement   altogether.   The
process of suffering is extremely long and painful.

34. Before parting with this case, we would like to observe that a
serious   relook   of   the   entire   provision   is   warranted   by   the
legislation.   It   is   also   a   matter   of   common   knowledge   that
exaggerated versions of the incident are reflected in a large number
of complaints. The tendency of over implication is also reflected in a
very large number of cases.

35. The criminal trials lead to immense sufferings for all concerned.
Even ultimate acquittal in the trial may also not be able to wipe
out the deep scars of suffering of ignominy. Unfortunately a large
number of these complaints have not only flooded the courts but
also have led to enormous social unrest affecting peace, harmony
and  happiness  of the society.  It is high  time  that  the legislature
must   take   into   consideration   the   pragmatic   realities   and   make
suitable   changes   in   the   existing   law.It   is   imperative   for   the
legislature to take into consideration the informed public opinion
and  the pragmatic  realities  in consideration  and  make  necessary
changes in the relevant provisions of law. We direct the Registry to
send a copy of this judgment to the Law Commission and to the
Union Law Secretary, Government of India who may place it before
the Hon'ble Minister for Law and Justice to take appropriate steps
in the larger interest of the society."

23. In the aforesaid context, it will also be profitable to quote a very
recent pronouncement of the Supreme Court in the case of Arnesh Kumar
Vs. State of Bihar, Criminal Appeal No. 1277 of 2014, decided on 2nd
July, 2014.  In the said case, the petitioner, apprehending arrest in a case

Page 7 of 15

R/CR.MA/10161/2014 CAV JUDGMENT

under
Section 498A
of the IPC and
Section 4
of the Dowry Prohibition
Act, 1961, prayed for anticipatory bail before the Supreme Court, having
failed   to   obtain  the  same  from  the  High  Court.     In   that  context,  the
observations made by the Supreme Court in paras 6, 7 and 8 are worth
taking note of.  They are reproduced below:­

"6. There   is   phenomenal   increase   in   matrimonial
disputes   in   recent   years.   The   institution   of   marriage   is
greatly revered in this country. Section 498­A of the
IPC
was
introduced   with   avowed   object   to   combat   the   menace   of
harassment to a woman at the hands of her husband and
his relatives. The fact that Section 498­A is a cognizable and
non­bailable   offence   has   lent   it   a   dubious   place   of   pride
amongst   the   provisions   that   are   used   as   weapons   rather
than shield by disgruntled wives. The simplest way to harass
is to get the husband and his relatives arrested under this
provision.   In   a   quite   number   of   cases,   bed­ridden   grand­
fathers   and   grand­mothers   of   the   husbands,   their   sisters
living abroad for decades are arrested. "Crime in India 2012
Statistics"   published   by   National   Crime   Records   Bureau,
Ministry of Home Affairs shows arrest of 1,97,762
persons   all   over   India   during   the   year   2012   for   offence
under Section 498­A of the
IPC
, 9.4% more than the year
2011.   Nearly   a   quarter   of   those   arrested   under   this
provision   in   2012   were   women   i.e.   47,951   which   depicts
that   mothers   and   sisters   of   the   husbands   were   liberally
included in their arrest net. Its share is 6% out of the total
persons arrested under the crimes committed under
Indian
Penal Code
. It accounts for 4.5% of total crimes committed
under different sections of penal code, more than any other
crimes excepting theft and hurt. The rate of charge­sheeting
in cases under
Section 498A
, IPC is as high as 93.6%, while
the conviction rate is only 15%, which is lowest across all
heads. As many as 3,72,706 cases are pending trial of which
on current estimate, nearly 3,17,000 are likely to result in
acquittal.

7. Arrest brings humiliation, curtails freedom and cast
scars forever. Law makers know it so also the police. There
is a battle  between  the law  makers  and  the police  and  it
seems that police has not learnt its lesson; the lesson implicit
and   embodied   in   the
Cr.PC
.   It   has   not   come   out   of   its
colonial   image   despite   six   decades   of   independence,   it   is
largely considered as a tool of harassment, oppression and
surely not considered a friend of public. The need for caution
in   exercising   the   drastic   power   of   arrest   has   been
emphasized time and again by Courts but has not yielded

Page 8 of 15

R/CR.MA/10161/2014 CAV JUDGMENT

desired   result.   Power   to   arrest   greatly   contributes   to   its
arrogance so also the failure of the Magistracy to check it.
Not   only   this,   the   power   of  arrest   is   one   of   the   lucrative
sources of police corruption. The attitude to arrest first and
then  proceed  with   the   rest   is   despicable.   It   has  become   a
handy tool to the police officers who lack sensitivity or act
with oblique motive.

8. Law   Commissions,   Police   Commissions   and   this
Court in a large number of judgments emphasized the need
to   maintain   a   balance   between   individual   liberty   and
societal   order   while   exercising   the   power   of   arrest.   Police
officers   make   arrest   as   they   believe   that   they   possess   the
power   to   do   so.   As   the   arrest   curtails   freedom,   brings
humiliation and casts scars forever, we feel differently. We
believe   that   no   arrest   should   be   made   only   because   the
offence is non­bailable and cognizable and therefore, lawful
for the police officers to do so. The existence of the power to
arrest is one thing, the justification for the exercise of it is
quite another. Apart from power to arrest, the police officers
must be able to justify the reasons thereof. No arrest can be
made   in   a   routine   manner   on   a   mere   allegation   of
commission of an offence made against a person. It would
be prudent  and  wise   for  a police  officer  that   no  arrest  is
made without a reasonable satisfaction reached after some
investigation as to the genuineness of the allegation. Despite
this   legal   position,   the   Legislature   did   not   find   any
improvement.   Numbers   of   arrest   have   not   decreased.
Ultimately,   the   Parliament   had   to   intervene   and   on   the
recommendation   of   the   177th   Report   of   the   Law
Commission submitted in the year 2001,
Section 41
of the
Code   of   Criminal   Procedure   (for   short   '
Cr.PC
),   in   the
present  form  came  to be enacted.  It is interesting  to note
that   such   a   recommendation   was   made   by   the   Law
Commission   in  its  152nd  and  154th  Report  submitted  as
back in the year 1994. ....   ....."

24. In the case of Geeta Mehrotra and anr. Vs. State of U.P. reported
in AIR 2013, SC 181, the Supreme Court observed as under:­

"19.   Coming to the facts of this case, when the
contents of the FIR

is   perused,   it   is   apparent   that   there   are   no   allegations   against
Kumari   Geeta   Mehrotra   and   Ramji   Mehrotra   except   casual
reference  of their  names  who  have  been  included  in the FIR but
mere   casual  reference   of  the   names   of   the   family   members  in   a
matrimonial dispute without allegation of active involvement in the

Page 9 of 15

R/CR.MA/10161/2014 CAV JUDGMENT

matter   would   not   justify   taking   cognizance   against   them
overlooking the fact borne out of experience that there is a tendency
to   involve   the   entire   family   members   of   the   household   in   the
domestic quarrel taking place in a matrimonial dispute specially if
it happens soon after the wedding.

20.   It would  be relevant at this stage to take note of an apt
observation  of this Court  recorded  in the matter  of
G.V.  Rao  vs.
L.H.V. Prasad & Ors
. reported in (2000) 3 SCC 693 wherein also
in a matrimonial dispute, this Court had held that the High Court
should have quashed the complaint arising out of a matrimonial
dispute   wherein   all   family   members   had   been   roped   into   the
matrimonial   litigation   which   was   quashed   and   set   aside.   Their
Lordships observed therein with which we entirely agree that:

"there   has   been   an   outburst   of   matrimonial   dispute   in
recent times. Marriage is a sacred ceremony, main purpose
of which is to enable the young couple to settle down in life
and   live   peacefully.   But   little   matrimonial   skirmishes
suddenly   erupt   which   often   assume   serious   proportions
resulting in heinous crimes in which elders of the family are
also   involved   with   the   result   that   those   who   could   have
counselled and brought about rapprochement are rendered
helpless on their being  arrayed  as accused  in the criminal
case. There are many reasons which need not be mentioned
here for not encouraging matrimonial litigation so that the
parties  may  ponder  over   their  defaults  and   terminate   the
disputes amicably by mutual agreement instead of fighting
it out in a court of law where it takes years and years to
conclude and in that process the parties lose their "young"

days in chasing their cases in different courts."

The view taken by the judges in this matter was that the courts
would  not encourage such disputes.

21.
In yet another case reported in AIR 2003 SC 1386 in the
matter  of
B.S.  Joshi  & Ors. vs.  State  of Haryana  & Anr.
it was
observed   that   there   is   no   doubt   that   the   object   of   introducing
Chapter   XXA  containing   Section  498A   in  the
Indian   Penal  Code

was   to   prevent   the   torture   to   a   woman   by   her   husband   or   by
relatives of her husband. Section 498A was added with a view to
punish the husband and his relatives who harass or torture the wife
to coerce her relatives to satisfy unlawful demands of dowry. But if
the   proceedings   are   initiated   by   the   wife   under   Section   498A
against   the   husband   and   his   relatives   and   subsequently   she   has
settled her disputes with her husband and his relatives and the wife
and husband agreed for mutual divorce, refusal to exercise inherent

Page 10 of 15

R/CR.MA/10161/2014 CAV JUDGMENT

powers by the High Court would not be proper as it would prevent
woman from settling earlier. Thus for the purpose of securing the
ends   of   justice   quashing   of   FIR   becomes   necessary,
Section   320

Cr.P.C. would not be a bar to the exercise of power of quashing. It
would however be a different matter depending upon the facts and
circumstances  of each  case whether  to exercise  or not  to exercise
such a power."

25. Thus, it could be seen from the above that the apex Court has
noticed the tendency of the married women roping in all the relatives of
her husband in such complaints only with a view to harass all of them,
though they may not be even remotely involved in the offence alleged.

26. Once the FIR is lodged under
Sections 498A
/
/
of the IPC
and
Sections 3
and
of the Dowry Prohibition Act, whether there are
vague, unspecific or exaggerated allegations or there is no evidence of
any physical or mental harm or injury inflicted upon woman that is likely
to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health, it comes as an easy
tool in the hands of Police and agencies like Crime Against Women Cell
to hound them with the threat of arrest making them run helter skelter
and force them to hide at their friends or relatives houses till they get
anticipatory   bail   as   the   offence   has   been   made   cognizable   and   non­
bailable. Thousands of such complaints and cases are pending and are
being lodged day in and day out.  There is a growing tendency to come
out with inflated and exaggerated allegations roping in each and every
relation of the husband and if one of them happens to be of higher status
or of a vulnerable standing, he or she becomes an easy prey for better
bargaining and blackmailing.

27. Mr.   Raval,   the   learned   APP   in   his   own   way   may   be   right   in
submitting that the Court, while exercising inherent power under Section
482 of  the  Code, should not embark  upon an enquiry  as regards  the
truthfulness   of   the   allegations  because,   according   to   Mr.   Raval,   once
there are allegations disclosing commission of a cognizable offence, then
whether they are true or false, should be left for the trial Court to decide
at the conclusion of the trial.   According to Mr. Raval, at the best, the
applicants Nos. 2 to 6 could plead in their defence the category No.7, as
indicated by the Supreme Court in the case of
State of Haryana
(supra).

28. Since Mr. Raval has raised such issue, I must deal with it as it goes
to the root of the matter.  For the sake of convenience, category 7, as
laid
down by
the Supreme Court in
State of Haryana
(supra)  is reproduced
hereinbelow:­

"(7)       Where   a   criminal   proceeding   is   manifestly   attended   with
mala   fide   and/or   where   the   proceeding   is   maliciously   instituted
with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and

Page 11 of 15

R/CR.MA/10161/2014 CAV JUDGMENT

with a view to spite him due to private and personal grudge."

29. I am of the view that the category 7
referred to above
should be
taken into consideration and applied in a case like the present one, a bit
liberally.  If the Court is convinced by the fact that the involvement by the
complainant   of   all   close   relatives   of   the   husband   is   with   an   oblique
motive, then even if the FIR and the charge­sheet disclose commission of
a cognizable offence on plain reading of the both, the Court, with a view
to doing substantial justice, should read in between the lines the oblique
motive of the complainant and take a pragmatic view of the matter.   If
the   proposition   of   law   as   sought   to   be   canvassed   by   Mr.   Raval,   the
learned APP is applied mechanically to this type of cases, then in my
opinion, the very inherent power conferred by the Code upon the High
Court would be rendered otiose.   I am saying so for the simple reason
that if the wife, due to disputes with her husband, decides to not only
harass her husband, but all other close relatives of the husband, then she
would ensure that proper allegations are levelled against each and every
such   relative,   although   knowing   fully   well   that   they   are   in   no   way
concerned   with the matrimonial dispute between the husband and the
wife.   Many times the services of professionals are availed of and once
the   complaint   is   drafted   by   a   legal   mind,   it   would   be   very   difficult
thereafter to  pick up  any loopholes or  other deficiencies in the same.
However, that does not mean that the Court should shut its eyes and
raise its hands in helplessness, saying that whether true or false, there are
allegations in the first information report and the charge­sheet papers
discloses the commission of a cognizable offence.

It is because of the growing tendency to involve innocent persons
that   the   Supreme   Court   in   the   case   of
Pawan   Kumar   Vs.   State   of
Haryana
,   AIR   1998   SC   958   has   cautioned   the   Courts   to   act   with
circumspection.     In   the   words   of   the   Supreme   Court   "often   innocent
persons are also trapped or brought in with ulterior motives and therefore
this places an arduous duty on the Court to separate such individuals from
the   offenders.       Hence,   the   Courts   have   to   deal   such   cases   with
circumspection,   sift   through   the   evidence   with   caution,   scrutinize   the
circumstances with utmost care."

30. More importantly, the respondent No.2 has not explained as to
why it took more than four years for her to register the FIR.   Is it so
because the  husband initiated proceedings for divorce in the year 2006.
My   attention   has   been   drawn   by   Mr.   Patel,   the   learned   Advocate
appearing on behalf of the applicants to a notice dated 17th April, 2008,
issued by the respondent No.2, through her advocate to the petitioner
No.1, wherein there is not a whisper of any allegations against any of the
relatives of the husband, which includes the applicants Nos. 2 to 6.

Page 12 of 15

R/CR.MA/10161/2014 CAV JUDGMENT

31. Many times, the parents including the close relatives of the wife
make a mountain out of a mole.  Instead of salvaging the situation and
making all possible endeavours to save the marriage, their action either
due to ignorance or on account of sheer hatredness towards the husband
and his family members, brings about complete destruction of marriage
on trivial issues.  The first thing that comes in the mind of the wife, her
parents and her relatives is the Police, as if the Police is the panacea of all
evil.  No sooner the matter reaches up to the Police, then even if there are
fair   chances   of   reconciliation   between   the   spouses,   they   would   get
destroyed.  The foundation of a sound marriage is tolerance, adjustment
and respecting one another.  Tolerance to each other's fault to a certain
bearable extent has to be inherent in every marriage.   Petty quibbles,
trifling differences are mundane matters and should not be exaggerated
and blown out of proportion to destroy what is said to have been made in
the heaven.  The Court must appreciate that all quarrels must be weighed
from that point of view in determining what constitutes cruelty in each
particular   case,   always   keeping   in   view   the   physical   and   mental
conditions   of   the   parties,   their   character   and   social   status.     A   very
technical and hyper sensitive approach would prove to be disastrous for
the very institution of the marriage.   In matrimonial disputes the main
sufferers are the children.   The spouses fight with such venom in their
heart that they do not think even for a second that if the marriage would
come to an end, then what will be the effect on their children.  Divorce
plays  a   very  dubious  role   so   far   as  the  upbringing  of   the  children  is
concerned.     The   only   reason   why   I   am   saying   so   is   that   instead   of
handling the whole issue delicately, the initiation of criminal proceedings
would bring about nothing but hatredness for each other.  There may be
cases of genuine ill­treatment and harassment by the husband and his
family members towards the wife.   The degree of such ill­treatment or
harassment may vary.  However, the Police machinery should be resorted
to as a measure of last resort and that too in a very genuine case of
cruelty and harassment.  The Police machinery cannot be utilized for the
purpose of holding the husband at ransom so that he could be squeezed
by the wife at the instigation  of her parents or relatives or friends.  In all
cases where wife complains of harassment or ill­treatment, Section 498­A
of the
IPC
cannot be applied mechanically.   No F.I.R is complete without

Sections 506(2)
and
of the IPC.  Every matrimonial conduct, which
may cause annoyance to the other, may not amount to cruelty.   Mere
trivial irritations, quarrels between spouses, which happen in day today
married life, may also not amount to cruelty.

32. Lord Denning, in   Kaslefsky Vs. Kaslefsky (1950) 2 All ER 398
observed as under:­

"When   the   conduct   consists   of   direct   action   by   one   against   the
other, it can then properly be said to be aimed at the other, even
though there is no desire to injure the other or to inflict misery on
him. Thus, it may consist of a display of temperament, emotion, or

Page 13 of 15

R/CR.MA/10161/2014 CAV JUDGMENT

perversion whereby the one gives vent to his or her own feelings,
not intending to injure the other, but making the other the object­
the butt­at whose expense the emotion is relieved."

When there is no intent to injure, they are not to be regarded as
cruelty unless they are plainly and distinctly proved to cause injury
to health ........when the conduct does not consist of direct action
against the other, but only of misconduct indirectly affecting him or
her,   such   as   drunkenness,   gambling,   or   crime,   then   it   can   only
properly be said to be aimed at the other when it is done, not only
for the gratification of the selfish desires of the one who does it, but
also in some part with an intention to injure the other or to inflict
misery on him or her. Such an intention may readily be inferred
from   the   fact   that   it   is   the   natural   consequence   of   his   conduct,
especially   when   the   one   spouse   knows,   or   it   has   already   been
brought   to   his   notice,   what   the   consequences   will   be,   and
nevertheless he does it, careless and indifferent whether it distresses
the other spouse or not. The Court is, however not bound to draw
the inference. The presumption that a person intends the natural
consequences of his acts is one that may not must­be drawn. If in
all the circumstances it is not the correct inference, then it should
not be drawn. In cases of this kind, if there is no desire to injure or
inflict misery on the other, the conduct only becomes cruelty when
the   justifiable   remonstrances   of   the   innocent   party   provoke
resentment on the part of the other, which evinces itself in actions
or words actually or physically directed at the innocent party."

33. What   constitutes   cruelty   in   matrimonial   matters   has   been   well
explained in American Jurisprudence 2nd edition Vol. 24 page 206.   It
reads thus:­

"The   question   whether   the   misconduct   complained   of   constitute
cruelty and the like for divorce purposes is determined primarily by
its effect upon the particular person complaining of the acts. The
question is not whether the conduct would be cruel to a reasonable
person or a person of average or normal sensibilities, but whether it
would have that effect upon the aggrieved spouse. That which may
be cruel to one person may be laughed off by another, and what
may not be cruel to an individual under one set of circumstances
may be extreme cruelty under another set of circumstances."

12. For the foregoing reasons, I am inclined to allow this petition and the
same  is  accordingly  allowed.    The  First   Information  Report  being   C.R.No.II­

Page 14 of 15

R/CR.MA/10161/2014 CAV JUDGMENT

276/2014 lodged with the 'A' Division Police Station of Mehsana for the offence
punishable under Sec.498­A r/w
sec. 114
of the Indian Penal Code and
Sections
and
of the Dowry (Prohibition) Act is hereby ordered to be quashed.

It is needless to clarify that I have examined this case only so far as the
present three petitioners are concerned.

(J.B.PARDIWALA, J.)
Mohandas

Page 15 of 15