Delhi District Court

St. vs . Rahul Verma Etc. on 12 July, 2018

IN THE COURT OF MS. SUNENA SHARMA, ADDITIONAL
SESSIONS JUDGE-03, SOUTH DISTRICT, SAKET COURTS, NEW
DELHI

SC No.7091/16 (Old No.94/14)
Unique ID No. 02406R0081712012

FIR No.167/11
U/s: 498A/304B/306/34
IPC

Police Station :Defence Colony

State
Vs.
1. Rahul Verma s/o Sh. Gyanchand
2. Gyanchand s/o Sh. Ram Chander
3. Madhu w/o Sh. Gyanchand
All r/o Quarter No.389, Type-II,
Sector -2, Sadiq Nagar, New Delhi
.... Accused

Date of Committal : 12.04.2012
Final arguments concluded on : 02.07.2018
Judgment pronounced on : 12.07.2018

JUDGMENT

1. Vide this judgment, I shall decide session case number
7091/16 which is an outcome of FIR No. 167/11 registered at PS
Defence Colony, u/s 498A/304B/34
IPC
in connection with a case of
dowry death.

Prosecution case as per charge sheet

2. As per charge sheet, the case of prosecution in brief is
that vide DD no.12 dated 29.12.2011, an information was received at

FIR No.167/11 Page No.1/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
PS Defence Colony regarding an attempt made by a lady to commit
suicide at 389, Sector-2, Type-II, Sadiq Nagar, Defence Colony.
Pursuant thereto, ASI Devender Singh with Ct. Bilas Rao reached at
the spot where victim was reported to have already been taken to
Mool Chand hospital by the family members. In the meanwhile,
another DD no.16A was received from the duty officer PS Defence
Colony at 3:05 pm, regarding admission of Gauri Verma w/o Rahul
Verma in Mool Chand hospital vide MLC no.530037 wherein she was
declared to have been brought dead. Upon said information, ASI
Devender Singh with Ct. Bilas Rao reached Mool Chand hospital and
collected MLC of deceased Gauri Verma and the dead body was lying
in the hospital. ASI Devender Singh conveyed about said incident to
the SHO and SDM of Defence Colony, who later reached the hospital
and inspected the dead body. SDM then gave directions for preserving
the dead body at AIIMS mortuary for postmortem. As per said
instruction, ASI Devender Singh through Ct. Vilas Rao got the dead
body preserved at AIIMS hospital. Thereafter, ASI Devender Singh,
SHO and SDM reached the spot for the purpose of inquiry.

2.1 The crime scene was got inspected through crime team
and photographs were clicked. From the spot, one chunni (the piece of
cloth worn by lady around the neck) which was found hanging at the
ceiling fan of the room and one piece of it with the knot and one
scissor lying on the bed were taken into police possession. As per the
instruction of the SDM, deceased's father Sohan Lal, her mother Smt.
Chandra Kala, her brother Inder Kohli and one Anil Kumar Goyal were
taken to SDM office where inquiries were made from them and their

FIR No.167/11 Page No.2/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
statements were recorded by the SDM. Thereafter, written directions
were given to SHO PS Defence Colony to investigate the matter and
take appropriate action as per law. Accordingly, IO, on the basis of the
statement Ex. PW1/A of deceased's father recorded before the SDM
on 29.12.2011, prepared rukka and got the present FIR lodged
u/s
498A
/
304-B
/
IPC.

2.2 In the above statement Ex. PW1/A, the father of the
deceased, Sh. Sohan Lal came up with the allegations that he got his
daughter Pinki @ Gauri married with accused Rahul Verma according
to Hindu Rites and Ceremony on 23.02.2011 and gave sufficient
dowry as per his status and capacity. However, his daughter's mother
in law Madhu, father in law Gyan Chand, husband Rahul were not
happy with the dowry and just after one month of her marriage, they
started harassing her. On account of said ill treatment and
harassment, his daughter i.e. deceased came to live at her parental
home in the month of November and stayed there for about one
month. On 28th November, deceased was directly taken from her
office to her matrimonial home by her husband Rahul Verma and
later, they were informed by the deceased on telephone that her
husband had counselled his parents and neither his parents nor he
himself would now quarrel with her. On 29.12.2011 i.e. the date of
incident, complainant was informed by his elder brother Chiranji Lal
regarding admission of deceased by her in laws in Mool Chand
hospital. After said information, when complainant reached the
hospital, he found his daughter Pinki lying dead in the hospital.

FIR No.167/11 Page No.3/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
2.3 Ex. PW1/A further shows that complainant was also put
certain questions by the SDM in answer to which he expressed his
suspicion that his daughter had been murdered by hanging her with
chunni because she was subjected to harassment and beatings by her
in laws on account of dowry.

2.4 SDM had also recorded the statements of other family
members of deceased namely deceased's uncle Chiranji Lal, brother
Inder Kohli, employer Anil Kumar Goyal and deceased's mother Smt.
Chanderkala which are available on record as Ex. PW3/A, Ex. PW4/A,
Ex. PW13/A & Ex. PW13/B.

2.5 Chiranji Lal in his statement Ex. PW3/A, narrated the facts
that complainant Sohan Lal was his brother and was having two
children namely daughter Pinki @ Gauri and son Inder. Pinki was elder
and she was graduate in Commerce from Delhi University and for the
last two years, she was working with Goyal Associates, a Chartered
Accountant Firm. The deceased got married with accused Rahul
Verma on 23.02.2011 and in the marriage, deceased's father gave
dowry to the best of his capacity. But, just after about one month of
marriage, in laws of deceased i.e. her father in law, mother in law and
husband started harassing her and every now and then they also
used to give her beatings and the deceased informed about all these
things to her father Sohan Lal. On account of said ill treatment at the
hands of her in laws, Pinki came to her parental home in the month of
November and she stayed there for about one month. Thereafter,
they talked to father in law of the deceased and they were assured

FIR No.167/11 Page No.4/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
that no such incident would recur and on their said assurance, the
deceased was sent to her matrimonial home. But, nothing changed
even thereafter as they continued to ill-treat her. On 29.12.2011, at
about 2:00 pm, he was informed by accused Gyan Chand on his
mobile phone that Pinki had done something and he asked him to
immediately come. While, he was still on the way, he again received
two phone calls from deceased's brother in law on his mobile phone
and he asked him to reach directly to Mool Chand hospital saying that
Pinki had already expired. Thereafter, he alongwith his wife Jamuna
reached Mool Chand hospital where he found accused Gyan Chand,
Rahul Verma and his younger brother (deceased's dever) present and
deceased was lying dead in the hospital. Thereafter, he informed his
brother Sohan Lal and asked him to immediately reach there.

2.6 Ex. PW4/A is the statement given by deceased's brother
Inder Kohli. In said statement, he stated that about 10 months before,
his parents had got his sister Pinki married to Rahul Verma according
to Hindu Rites and Ceremonies and in her marriage, sufficient dowry
was given. However, his sister used to tell them on phone that she
was being taunted by her father in law, mother in law for bringing less
dowry and they also used to quarrel with her saying that her parents
had befooled them by giving meager dowry. As and when deceased
complained about said behaviour of her in laws to her husband, he
also used to beat her and also used to suspect her for having extra
marital affairs with some other person. He further stated that about
said ill treatment meted out to his sister, he had informed his parents.
On 29.12.2011, he got an information from his father about death of

FIR No.167/11 Page No.5/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
his sister Pinki @ Gauri. After said information, he immediately rushed
to Mool Chand hospital.

2.7 Ex. PW 13/B is the statement of deceased's mother given
before SDM. As per her statement, her daughter used to
telephonically inform them that her in laws and husband were not
right people and used to get her assaulted through her husband and
also used to ask her that if she wanted separate home, she should
ask her parents for the same as they had given insufficient dowry.

2.8 Ex. PW13/A is the statement of deceased's employer Anil
Goyal given before SDM. In said statement, he stated that deceased
was working in his office prior to her marriage and then left the job for
sometime and thereafter, rejoined back in the year 2011. She used to
sit in the office next to another girl Monu Bhatnagar at whose mobile
she had sent a SMS informing that she had a fight with her husband
and her husband had hit her as well and since she was not felling
well, she would not come to office. He further stated that deceased
had told him that her husband was of quite suspicious nature and
therefore, she preferred a seat near other girl colleagues.

3. After completion of investigation, chargesheet was filed
before the court of Ld. Magistrate on 27.03.2012 against husband,
mother in law and father in law of deceased upon which cognizance
was taken for the offences punishable
u/s 498A
/
304B
/
IPC. After
compliance of
Section 207
Cr.P.C., Ld. Magistrate committed the case
to the Court of Session on 10.04.2012 and same came to be assigned

FIR No.167/11 Page No.6/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
to this court on 12.04.2012.

4. Vide order dated 31.05.2012, charges for offences
punishable
u/s 498A
/
304-B
/
IPC were framed against all the three
accused persons; in alternate to
Section 304B
IPC, charges for offence

u/s 306
/
IPC were also framed against all the accused to which they
pleaded not guilty and claimed trial.

5. In order to prove its case, prosecution examined 22
witnesses namely PW1 Sh. Sohan Lal, PW2 Smt. Chanderkala, PW3
Sh. Chiranji Lal, PW4 Sh. Inder Kohli, PW5 Dr. Karthik Krishna, PW6 Dr.
Ritu Kathuria, PW7 Ms. Jaspreet Bhatnagar @ Monu, PW8 Sh. Anil
Kumar Goyal, PW9 Inspector Naresh Kumar, PW10 Sh. Sandeep, PW11
ASI Devender Singh, PW12 Ct. Vilas Rao, PW13 Sh. Pravesh Ranjan
Jha, PW14 Ct. Ajay Kumar, PW15 HC Arvind Kumar Dubey, PW16 Sh.
Om Prakash Kohli, PW17 Ct. Surender Rawat, PW18 Ct. Onkar Mal,
PW19 SI Amit Kumar, PW20 Dr. Virender Singh, PW21 Ct. Dev Raj and
PW22 SI Mahipal Singh.

Prosecution evidence

6. PW1/Sohan Lal is the father of deceased. As per his
version, his daughter Pinki @ Gauri was married to accused Rahul
Verma on 23.02.2011. Household goods like furniture, LCD, TV,
washing machine, jewellery and clothes etc. were given in the
marriage by PW1 to the best of his capacity. Before marriage, PW1
was told that accused Rahul was working in a Multi National Company
and earning Rs.30-40 thousand per month. His daughter was working

FIR No.167/11 Page No.7/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
as an accountant with M/s Goel Associates. Before marriage, it was
agreed that his daughter would not work after marriage. But, just
after about 2-3 months of marriage, Rahul Verma left his job.
Thereafter, accused Rahul Verma and his parents started pressuring
his daughter to look for a job as Rahul Verma was doing nothing. They
also started harassing his daughter and under compelling
circumstances, she again joined the same company where she was
working earlier. But accused Rahul kept her ATM and he used to say
that when he will get a job, he would allow her to leave her job.
Accused Rahul Verma kept spending all her salary by using her ATM
card.

6.1 PW1 further testified that his daughter used to tell them
about all the said things as and when she used to visit them. In
October, 2011 his daughter became pregnant. The accused however,
got her pregnancy terminated without their information. Accused
persons used to demand Rs.3 lacs and asked her to approach them
(her parents) for money. Deceased was constantly harassed by the
accused persons as they demanded Rs. 3 lacs on the pretext of
buying a house in Noida. On 28th day of the month, accused took his
daughter Pinki from her office directly stating that he had pacified his
parents and they would not raise any demand of money from her.
However, prior to that i.e. 2nd or 3rd deceased was going to her office
from her parental home where she was left by the accused. Further
that, after she was taken from her office by accused Rahul, they
received a phone call from deceased Pinki informing that she was still
being harassed for Rs.3 lacs upon which, PW1 assured her that as and

FIR No.167/11 Page No.8/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
when he was able to arrange money, he would give the same to
them.

6.2 PW1 further deposed that before he could meet their
demand, his (PW1's) brother received a phone call from Saurabh
Verma, the brother of accused Rahul for asking them to reach hospital
saying that Pinki had done something to herself. PW1 further deposed
that all four accused persons had murdered his daughter. PW1 further
testified that his statement was recorded by SDM vide Ex. PW1/A
bearing his signature at point A and he had also handed over the list
of dowry articles Ex. PW1/B given in the marriage to the police. PW1
had also identified the dead body of his daughter in the hospital vide
his statement Ex. PW1/C and received the same vide memo Ex.
PW1/D.

7. PW2/Smt. Chanderkala is the mother of deceased. As per
her version, her daughter Gauri @ Pinki was married to accused Rahul
(correctly identified). Before the marriage, they were informed that
accused Rahul was employed with a company in Bangalore and was
earning Rs.20,000 to Rs.25,000/- per month. PW2 further deposed
that as their daughter i.e. deceased was also employed in Green Park
area, they considered it a good proposal as both were employed.
Thereafter, marriage was performed on 23.02.2011. In the marriage,
they gave all the household articles including jewellery and other
things like bed, T.V., almirah, fridge, washing machine and clothes etc.
After marriage, her daughter informed her that accused Rahul was not
working anywhere and used to stay at home, on which PW2 consoled

FIR No.167/11 Page No.9/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
her daughter not to worry saying that Rahul would soon get a job.
Further as per examination in chief of PW2, all accused persons used
to harass her daughter on account of demand for money. Before the
marriage, accused had asked their daughter to leave the job but after
marriage accused Rahul insisted deceased to go back to her job and
accordingly, her daughter again started working and earning
Rs.15,000/- per month. But, she was never allowed to retain any
money out of her salary by the accused persons as she was given
only a meager amount for her expenses by her husband. Further that,
her daughter used to also complain that accused did not allow her to
have sufficient balance in her mobile phone and for said reason, she
was not able to even make calls to them. PW2 further testified that
when her daughter asked accused Rahul to live separately, he (Rahul)
asked her (deceased) to bring Rs.3 lacs to take a separate home. PW2
told her daughter to convey to Rahul their inability to fulfill his
demand as they had spent a lot in the marriage. Thereafter, accused
Rahul told her daughter that she should ask them (her parents) to
give them one room in their (deceased's parents) two rooms house at
Wazir Nagar, but since said house was already on rent, deceased was
accordingly informed by PW2. PW2 further deposed that thereafter, at
the instance of his parents, accused Rahul left Pinki at their home as
they (deceased's parents) did not fulfill their demand of Rs.3 lacs.

7.1 PW2 further testified that in the month of October when
they visited Haridwar, accused Rahul and her daughter Pinki also
accompanied them. After coming back from Haridwar, her daughter
fell sick as she was pregnant and in that condition, accused Rahul left

FIR No.167/11 Page No.10/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
her at their house. Upon being asked as to why she (deceased) was
left at their house, deceased told her (PW2) that despite her having
fallen sick, her mother in law used to comment that who would do the
household work therefore, accused Rahul left her at their house for 8-
10 days. Even from parental home, she (deceased) continued her job
and her husband i.e. accused Rahul used to pick and drop her. On
20th November, accused Rahul took back the deceased by stating
that she was to be taken to the hospital for conducting some tests
and returned by 2:00 pm. Further that, deceased Pinki told her that
she was taken to some clinic at Lajpat Nagar by all the accused where
she was given some injection and thereafter, she became
unconscious. Thereafter, she was left at their house and later she
(deceased) came to know that her child got aborted while she was
unconscious. Thereafter, she (deceased) stayed at their house for
about eight days (wrongly written as eight months). On 28th
November, deceased was taken to her matrimonial home by her
husband directly from her office. By making a call, deceased Pinki told
her (PW2) that she was being taken by accused from her office on the
assurance that his (accused Rahul's) parents would not demand
money. However, Pinki told her that her mother in law again
commented as to why did accused Rahul bring her (deceased) back to
her matrimonial home. PW2 further testified that thereafter, Pinki
never came to their home and finally, they came to know about death
of their daughter through her brother in law who had received said
information from Gian Chand, pursuant to which, they reached Mool
Chand hospital where they found their daughter lying dead.

FIR No.167/11 Page No.11/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.

8. PW3/Sh. Chiranji Lal is the uncle of deceased. He in his
examination in chief, deposed that deceased Pinki was his niece i.e.
daughter of his younger brother. She got married to accused Rahul
Verma in the month of February, 2011. After marriage, deceased Pinki
started living in her matrimonial home. After sometime, some
differences arose between accused persons and Pinki. Pinki used to
tell that her mother in law, father in law and husband used to harass
her as they were not happy with the marriage as it was not as per the
expected standards of accused. PW3 further testified that in order to
resolve the dispute, he had once called accused Rahul and deceased
Pinki but husband of Pinki did not turn up and stayed at deceased's
parental home while Pinki visited his house. Accused Rahul told Pinki
not to insist him to visit PW3 otherwise, he would leave even Pinki's
father's house. Thereafter, PW3 also met father of Rahul and asked
him to resolve the matter, but he also did not pay any heed to his
(PW3's) request. Thereafter, accused persons raised demand of a
house and a cash of Rs. 3 lacs for the purpose of registration of house
and for this reason, the differences kept increasing. Accused persons
had also demanded the flat belonging to his (PW3's) brother but, his
brother neither gave the flat nor any money to the accused and
differences kept on increasing to the extent that finally, Pinki was
murdered. As per PW3, he had received a call from accused Gyan
Chand who informed him that Pinki had done something to herself
and asked them to immediately reach his house. While PW3 was
leaving for their house, he received another call from Saurabh
(brother in law of deceased) saying that they were taking Pinki to
Mool Chand hospital and he (PW3) should reach there. Thereafter,

FIR No.167/11 Page No.12/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma etc.
PW3 alongwith his wife and deceased's mother reached Mool Chand
hospital where Pinki was found dead. His statement Ex. PW3/A was
recorded by SDM.

9. PW4/Sh. Inder Koli is the brother of deceased. As per his
version, his sister Pinki got married with accused Rahul Verma. After
marriage, he was telephonically informed by his sister that her father
in law, mother in law and brother in law had been harassing her on
account of dowry. She also told him that whenever she complained
about said conduct of her in laws to her husband, then even her
husband scolded her and did not believe her. PW4 further deposed
that after deceased's marriage, he used to visit his sister on every
Sunday and used to take some eatables for her. On said visits,
accused persons used to complain about insufficiency of dowry.
Further that, even when his sister Pinki visited their house on the
occasion of Rakshabandhan festival, she disclosed about displeasure
of accused on account of insufficiency of dowry. PW4 further testified
that his statement Ex.PW4/A was recorded by SDM after the death of
his sister.

10. PW5/Dr. Karthik Krishna proved postmortem report as Ex.
PW5/A. As per his version, on 30.12.2011, while he was posted at
mortuary, AIIMS, he conducted postmortem on the body of deceased
Gauri Verma @ Pinki, aged 26 years. On examination, bluish
decolouration of lips oral mucosa and nails were present, ligature
mark was present. PW5 further deposed that after postmortem
examination, it was opined that the cause of death was asphyxia due

FIR No.167/11 Page No.13/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
to ante-mortem hanging. Time since death was about one day.

11. PW6/Dr. Ritu Kathuria proved the MLC of deceased as Ex.
PW6/A. As per her deposition, on 29.12.2011 while she was posted at
Mool Chand hospital, one Gauri Verma w/o Rahul Verma, aged about
26 years was brought to the emergency. Upon examination, pulse was
not recorded. There was no respiration, ECG showed flat line. After
detailed examination, she was declared brought dead.

12. PW7/Ms. Jaspreet Bhatnagar @ Monu is the colleague of
deceased. She deposed that she had been working with M/s Anil K.
Goel & Associates and deceased Pinki also used to work there and she
was having good terms with her. As per her version, on 29.12.2011,
she received a SMS from Pinki on her mobile phone no. 9560026222
stating that "Mere husband ke sath mera Jhagra ho gaya hai aur
mujhe maara bhi. Meri tabiyat theek nahi, aaj mai nahi aa paugi sir ko
bata dena". PW7 forwarded the same to Mr. Anil Goel. Later on, Anil
Goel received the information that Pinki had died and he also visited
PS Defence Colony in that regard. PW7 further deposed that later on,
she told the police about SMS and a print out of the same i.e. Ex.
PW7/A containing correct contents of the same received by her from
Pinki, was taken out on which her signature were taken at point A and
she also made her endorsement in her own handwriting on the same
from point A2 to A2.

13. PW8/Anil Kumar Goyal is the employer of deceased. As
per his version, deceased Pinki used to work in his office.
On

FIR No.167/11 Page No.14/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
20.12.2011, a SMS was received by his (PW8's) another employee Ms.
Jaspreet Bhatnagar from Pinki for informing that she (deceased) would
not be coming to the office as she had a fight with her husband and
she was also assaulted by her husband. PW8 further deposed that Ms.
Jaspreet Bhatnagar forwarded said message to him in the afternoon.
Later, when they came to know about deceased's death, PW8 visited
PS Defence Colony and informed about said SMS, a print out of which
Ex. PW7/A bearing his signatures at point B and endorsement on point
B to B was also taken.

14. PW9/Inspector Naresh Kumar deposed that on 29.12.2011,
he was posted as Incharge Mobile Crime Team, South-East. Upon
receipt of an information from South District, Control Room, he
alongwith HC Bhagwan Singh (Finger Print Proficient) and Ct. Dev Raj
(Photographer) reached at the spot i.e. H. No.389, Type-II, Sector-II,
Sadiq Nagar, New Delhi where IO/ASI Devender met them. At the
spot, one half piece of chunni (dupata) was found tied with the ceiling
fan while the other half portion of it was lying on the bed. PW9 further
deposed that deceased had already been removed to the hospital.
PW9 inspected the scene of crime and Ct. Dev Raj took the
photographs of scene of crime from different angles and he (PW9)
prepared his crime team report Ex. PW9/A bearing his signatures at
point A.

15. PW10/Sh. Sandeep deposes that on 29.12.2011, at about
1:30 pm when he was present at his home at H. No.550, Sector-2,
Sadiq Nagar, he heard some noise. Saurabh @ Ashu (brother of

FIR No.167/11 Page No.15/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
accused Rahul) came to his house calling him (PW10) by his name.
PW10 also heard some screams of Pinki which was coming from the
back side of his house where accused Rahul used to reside. When he
reached to his kitchen situated on the backside of his house and
looked toward Rahul's house, he saw him (accused Rahul) breaking
the window while uttering Pinki-PInki. PW10 came back to his room,
worn clothes and went down stairs. Thereafter, he reached to the
house of accused Rahul where he found Pinki was on the bed and all
family members were crying. Further as per PW10, he also noticed a
Chunni on the ceiling fan. He thought that something wrong had
happened and medical help was required. Thereafter, he alongwith
Saurabh left to bring some doctor for medical aid. On the way, upon
asking of Saurabh, he dialed 100 number and informed police that it
was an emergency and ambulance was required as it appeared to be
suicidal attempt or something like that. Thereafter, they reached
Shyam Nursing Home but that doctor refused to accompany them.
Thereafter, they again reached back to the house of Saurabh and
decided to call a TSR. PW10 left for the TSR stand and brought an
auto but by that time, Rahul had already taken his wife to the hospital
in a car.

16. PW 11/ASI Devender Singh is the first IO, who first
reached the spot. As per his version, on 29.12.2011, when he was
posted at PS Defence Colony on emergency duty, at about 1.44pm,
on receipt of copy of DD No.12A Ex.PW11/A, he alongwith Ct. Bilas
Rao reached at House No.389, Sector-2, Type-II, Sadiq Nagar, Defence
Colony. By that time Pinki @ Gauri was taken to unknown hospital by

FIR No.167/11 Page No.16/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
her family members and he was informed by Duty officer on
telephone that Pinki @ Gauri had been taken to Moolchand hospital
and she was admitted there vide MLC No.530037 and was declared as
brought dead. He alongwith Ct. Bilas Rao reached at Mool Chand
Hospital where dead body of deceased Pinki @ Gauri was lying. He
collected the MLC of deceased and informed SHO PS Defence Colony
as well as area SDM about the death of deceased. Subsequently, both
SDM and SHO reached at Moolchand hospital. Area SDM inspected the
dead body. SDM directed him to preserve the dead body at AIIMS for
postmortem. He sent the dead body through Ct. Bilas Rao vide an
application Ex.PW11/B to request for preserving the dead body. He
alongwith SHO and area SDM reached at the spot i.e. house no.389,
Sector-2, Type II, Sadiq Nagar, Defence Colony where SHO and SDM
inspected the spot. He noticed that some portion of Chunni was tied
with the fan and remaining portion of the Chunni was lying on bed.
One scissor was also found lying on the bed and one pair of plastic
gloves were lying at the spot. Both the pieces of chunni, gloves and
scissor were sealed in a pullanda with the seal of DS and taken into
police possession vide seizure memo Ex.PW11/C bearing signature of
PW11 at point A. Said articles were seized in the presence of SDM.
SDM directed him to bring the relatives/parents of deceased Pinki @
Gauri to his office. He accordingly took Sohan Lal (father of
deceased), Inder Kohli (brother of deceased) and elder brother of
father of Pinki @ Gauri and other relatives of deceased to the office of
SDM where SDM recorded their statements and directed SHO PS
Defence Colony to investigate the case and to take appropriate action
as per the law.

As per the directions of SDM, he prepared rukka

FIR No.167/11 Page No.17/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
Ex.PW11/D, bearing his signature at point A and got the case
registered. When they reached at the spot from Moolchand hospital,
SHO called the Crime team. Crime team inspected the spot and took
the photographs. After registration of FIR, investigation of the case
was handed over to SI Mahipal.

16.1 PW11 further deposed that he had also deposited the
pullanda in the malkhana and as per the directions of SDM, he moved
an application Ex.PW11/E on 30.12.2011 to conduct the postmortem
on the dead body of deceased. After postmortem, dead body was
handed over to the father of deceased. Inder Kohli, brother of
deceased had identified the dead body in the mortuary. PW11
correctly identified the scissor as Ex.P1, pair of gloves as Ex.P2 and
pieces of chunni as Ex.P3 saying that same were seized from the spot.

16.2 PW11 was put certain court questions regarding condition
of dead body when he saw it for the first time, to which he gave the
answer that there were ligature mark on the neck of the dead body,
eyes were closed but he did not remember the exact mark on the
neck of the body. To a court question regarding the height of the room
and the height of the fan installed in the room where dead body was
found, PW11 replied that the height of the room was approximately
10 feet, the space between the fan and floor of the room was about
8.5feet and the object/furniture which he found just below the fan was
a bed of 1.5 feet height.

17. PW12/Ct. Vilas Rao has deposed that on 29.12.2011, he

FIR No.167/11 Page No.18/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
was posted as Constable in PS Defence Colony. On that day, he was
on emergency duty from 8am to 8pm with ASI Devender Singh. Upon
receipt of copy of DD No.12A, he alongwith ASI Devender Singh
reached at Q.No.389, Sector-2, Type-2, Sadiq Nagar and came to know
that one lady, who had attempted to commit suicide had been taken
to Moolchand Hospital by her family members. He alongwith ASI
Devender Singh reached at Moolchand hospital where the lady was
already declared brought dead. They took the dead body to AIIMS and
got it preserved. From the spot, one portion of chunni which was tied
with the fan and other portion which was lying on the bed, one scissor
and one pair of plastic gloves which were lying in the room, were
sealed in a pullanda with the seal of DS and taken into police
possession vide seizure memo Ex.PW11/C. PW12 identified said
scissor, pair of gloves and two pieces of chunni as Ex.P1, Ex.P2 and
Ex.P3 respectively and deposed that those were the same articles
which had been seized from the spot. On being asked a court question
as to who had made the 100 number call i.e. whether it was made by
hospital authorities or in laws of the deceased, the witness replied
that he did not know. PW12 further deposed that the door of the room
where the suicide was committed was open. Bedsheet was not on the
bed, one of the window of the room was broken towards outside. He
further deposed that he could not say with certainty as to what was
the length of the chunni before it was torn.

18. PW13/ Shri Pravesh Ranjan Jha is the SDM who conducted
inquest proceedings. He deposed that on 29.12.2011, upon receipt of
an information from PS Defence Colony regarding unnatural death of

FIR No.167/11 Page No.19/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
a lady, who was taken to Moolchand hospital, he reached at
Moolchand hospital, where Doctor on duty told him that the lady
namely Pinki was declared brought dead. He examined the dead body
and found ligature mark and directed police officer for preservation of
dead body. Thereafter, he alongwith police officials reached at the
place of occurrence i.e. flat no.389, Sector-2, Type-II, Sadiq Nagar.
There were two rooms in the front side of the house, one room was
behind those rooms adjacent to bathroom and kitchen. On the
backside room double bed was lying. Half portion of the chunni was
tied on the ceiling fan just above the double bed. Half portion of the
chunni was lying on the double bed and one scissor was also lying
there. One pair of gloves were also lying on the bed. As per his
directions, police seized said items from the spot vide memo
Ex.PW11/C. Thereafter, he came to his office and directed police
officials to produce the relatives of the deceased in his office for
recording their statements. On 29.12.2011, at about 8.30pm, Sh.
Sohan Lal, father of the deceased came to his office alongwith his
wife, son and elder brother Shri Chiranji Lal. He recorded the
statement of Shri Sohan Lal as Ex.PW1/A, Shri Chiranji Lal as
Ex.PW3/A, Inder Kohli as Ex.PW4/A, Anil Kumar Goel as Ex.PW13/A and
that of Smt. Chander Kala as Ex.PW13/B. In the hospital, he conducted
proceedings
u/s 176
Cr.PC Ex.PW13/C and moved an application
Ex.PW13/D for conducting the postmortem. On 29.12.2011, he
directed SHO PS Defence Colony to investigate the matter and for
appropriate action vide his endorsement Ex.PW13/E. He also sent the
recorded statements alongwith the letter Ex.PW13/E to the SHO PS
Defence Colony.

Further that, on 05.01.2012, after receiving the

FIR No.167/11 Page No.20/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.

postmortem report, he sent the same to SHO PS Defence Colony vide
his letter Ex.PW13/F.

19. PW14/Ct. Ajay Kumar had joined the investigation of
present case on 30.12.2011 with SI Mahipal. As per his version, he
with SI Mahipal had gone to the House No.389, Type II, Sector-II, Sadiq
Nagar, New Delhi where IO made inquiries from the neighbourhood
and recorded statement of Sandeep and Deshraj. IO also prepared
site plan, interrogated accused Rahul Verma and arrested him vide
arrest memo Ex.PW14/A. Rahul's personal search was conducted vide
memo Ex.PW14/B. Accused Rahul Verma also produced two mobile
phones, one of make Samsung and other phone was of Nokia. Mobile
phones were seized vide memo Ex.PW14/C and same were sealed in a
pullanda with the seal of DS.

19.1 PW14 also identified two mobile phones make Samsung
and Nokia as Ex.P1 & P2 respectively. He further deposed that IO had
interrogated accused Rahul Verma and also recorded his statement
vide Ex.PW14/D.

20. PW15/HC Arvind Kumar Dubey has deposed that on
29.12.2011, he was working as Duty Officer from 04.00 pm to 12.00
mid night. On that day, at about 11.35 pm, ASI Devender Singh
handed over him a Rukka in Duty Officer Room. He recorded FIR of
this case bearing No. 167/11 under
Section 498A
/
304B
/
IPC. He
proved on record the computer copy of FIR as Ex.PW15/A and his
endorsement on rukka as ExPW15/B.

FIR No.167/11 Page No.21/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.

21. PW-16/ Sh. Om Prakash Kohli was the mediator in the
marriage of deceased. As per his version, the marriage was
solemnized about 4 years ago. PW16 was knowing both Sohan Lal as
well as accused Gyan Chand. At the time of marriage, there was no
dowry demand though Sohan Lal had given house hold articles like
TV, fridge, washing machine in the marriage of deceased. He further
deposed that at the time of alleged incident i.e. at the time of death
of the daughter of complainant Sohan Lal, he had gone to
Maharashtra. When he came back from Maharashtra, he came to
know that daughter of Sohan Lal had committed suicide. After the
incident, he along with police official and Sohan Lal and his wife and
son had gone to the house of accused person at Sadiq Nagar. From
the house of Gyan Chand, some jewellery items containing gold set
and other jewellery items were seized by the police in his presence.
The articles were taken into possession vide memo Ex.16/A. Police
also seized house hold articles containing gas cylinder, utensils,
furniture, washing machine, fridge, almirah, motorcycle etc. These
items were also seized by the police vide memo Ex.PW16/B. PW16
identified his signatures on all the memos at point A.

22. PW-17/Ct. Surender Rawat has deposed that on 17.2.12,
he had been posted as Constable in PS Defence Colony. On that day,
as per the direction of IO, he collected two sealed pullandas
containing two cell phones from the MHC(M) and deposited the same
in the office of FSL vide RC no. 5/21/12. Receipt of depositing the case
property was handed over to MHC(M). So long as the case property

FIR No.167/11 Page No.22/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
remained in his possession, it was not tampered with in any manner.

23. PW18/ Ct. Onkar Mal has deposed that on 19.12.2014, on
the direction of MHCM, he had brought result of exhibits of present
case from FSL Rohini and handed over the same to MHCM. The
exhibits and result which he had brought from FSL Rohini were not
tampered till they remained in his possession.

24. PW19/SI Amit Kumar had only filed the FSL report in
respect of exhibits collected in this case, by way of supplementary
chargesheet, hence, his testimony is not very relevant.

25. PW-20 is Dr. Virender Singh, the Assistant Director
(Documents) at FSL, Rohini. As per his version, on 17.02.2012, one
sealed parcel duly sealed with the seal of DS was received in his office
from PS Defence Colony and was marked to him for inspection. The
said parcel was containing :

1. One Nokia mobile phone model no. 7210C having
IMEI No. 351962/03/603533/1 having SIM card of
Vodaphone bearing no. 00406304122H1. SIM card
was marked as SC1 and mobile phone was marked as
MP1.

2. One mobile phone make Samsung Model No. C5212
(Dual SIM) having IMEI No. 353350/03/003235/5 and
IMEI No. 353351/03/003235/3. The phone was marked
as MP-2. Two SIM cards, one was of Idea and other
wasof Vodafone bearing nos. 89910453010716880054
and 60010513815H3. Both these SIMs were marked
as SC-2 and SC-3. This phone was also containing one

FIR No.167/11 Page No.23/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
memory card of San Disc of 1 GB capacity. It was
marked MC-1.

25.1 PW20 examined all the aforesaid exhibits. After
examination, he found mark MP-1 was found containing data retrieved
on 10 sheets which were marked by him as P-1 to P-10. These sheets
are Ex. PW-20/P-1 to P-10. All these sheets bear his seal at point A. On
examination of Ex. SC-1 to SC-3, it was found containing data which
was retrieved on sheets marked by him as P-11 to P-23. Same is Ex.

PW-20/P-11 to P-23. All these sheets bear his seal at point A.

25.2 On examination of Ex. Mark MC-1, it was found containing
video's which were converted by him in DVD and marked the said
DVD as DVD-1 and the data recorded in the said DVD was named
"Data of MC-1". His detailed report in this regard is Ex. PW-20/A which
bears his signature at point A. After examination, aforesaid exhibits
were sealed with the seal of DOC FSL. Witness also identified the
DVD Ex.PW20/B as the same which was prepared by him containing
data of MC-1. It also bears signatures of witness on the DVD.

26. PW-21, Ct. Dev Raj is the photographer from Mobile Crime
Team. He testified in his examination in chief that on 29.12.2011, he
alongwith SI Naresh Kumar, Incharge Crime Team and HC Bhagwan
Singh, Finger Prints Proficient had reached at H.No. 389, Sector-II,
Sadiq Nagar. On reaching there, ASI Devender alongwith other police
staff met them. Incharge Crime Team inspected the place of
occurrence. On the directions of IO, he had taken nine photographs of

FIR No.167/11 Page No.24/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
the place of occurrence. Negatives of those photographs were handed
over to the IO and prints were got developed by the IO himself.
Witness identified nine prints of photographs, lying on the record,
which were taken by him as Ex.PW21/A-1 to Ex.PW21/A-9 and
negatives as Ex.PW21/B-1 to Ex.PW21/B-9.
He has further deposed
that he had given the negatives to the IO on 09.01.2012 and his
statement to this effect was recorded by the IO. They remained at the
spot from 3.00 PM to 3.30 PM.

27. PW22/SI Mahipal Singh is the second IO of the case to
whom the investigation was marked on 29.12.2011 after registration
of FIR. During investigation, he made inquiries from the family
members of the deceased Pinki @ Gauri. On 30.12.2011, at the
instance of ASI Devender, he prepared site plan Ex.PW22/A. He
examined Sandeep @ Sandy, who had informed the police and PW
Deshraj, who took the deceased to the hospital and recorded their
statements. Rahul, husband of the deceased was present in the house
and the facts disclosed by the accused were recorded as interrogation
report Ex.PW14/D. Accused Rahul was already arrested vide arrest
memo and his personal search memo Ex.PW14/B was also prepared.
Two mobile phones were also recovered from accused Rahul out of
which, one was of Samsung and another of Nokia. Accused Rahul
further told that mobile phone make Samsung belonged to him and
mobile phone make Nokia was usually used by his wife. On checking,
both said the mobile phones were found containing the messages.
Both the mobile phones were sealed in a parcel with the seal of DS.
Witness further deposed that since he was newly posted in that police

FIR No.167/11 Page No.25/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
station, therefore, he used the seal of ASI Devender and took said
phones into police possession vide seizure memo Ex.PW14/C. Said
parcel of phones was deposited in malkhana and later on sent to FSL
for analysis. PW22 also collected the postmortem report Ex.PW5/A.
During investigation, he had also collected the call details of aforesaid
mobile phones recovered from accused Rahul. He also arrested other
two accused persons Gyan Chand and Smt. Madhu vide their arrest
memos Ex.PW22/B & Ex.PW22/C respectively.

27.1 During investigation, it was revealed to PW22 that just
prior to the death of deceased, she had sent a message through her
mobile phone to her friend Jaspreet @ Monu stating that she had a
quarrel with her husband on previous day and she was also beaten up
by her husband therefore, she could not come to office. During
investigation, one list of dowry articles Ex.PW1/B was given by the
father of deceased. Istridhan articles were also recovered and taken
into police possession vide seizure memo Ex.PW16/A and Ex.PW16/B.
During investigation, IO/PW22 also recorded statements of witnesses,
who had joined investigation with him and on completion of
investigation, he filed the chargesheet in the court through SHO.

Statement of accused u/s 313 Cr.P.C.

28. After completion of investigation, statements
u/s 313

Cr.P.C. of all accused persons were separately recorded wherein all
the incriminating evidence which had come on record during trial was
put to the accused persons but the same was denied by them as
wrong and incorrect. They pleaded their innocence by stating that

FIR No.167/11 Page No.26/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
they had never demanded anything from the deceased or her family
members nor they ever harassed the deceased physically or mentally.
They further pleaded that deceased, on the instigation of her family
members, wanted to settle a nuclear family for which accused Rahul
refused which was the prime reason of dispute between her
(deceased) and accused Rahul. Accused Rahul also examined himself
as DW1 in defence.

Defence Evidence

29. DW1/Rahul Verma is the husband of deceased who
deposed that his marriage was solemnized with the deceased on
dated 23.02.2011. The marriage was love cum arrange marriage. His
wife was engaged to one Anil Kohli by her parents prior to his
marriage with DW1, but that engagement was cancelled by her
parents as Pinki was not happy and not ready for said marriage with
Anil Kohli. DW1 further deposed that thereafter, their parents met
with each other through mediator Shri Om Prakash Koli, who was
known to both the families. His parents proposed for a simple
marriage at a temple but that proposal was declined by deceased's
parents. After their marriage, he and Pinki went for honeymoon at
Massourie and they were happy. DW1 further deposed that he and his
family had also attended the retirement party of the uncle (Tauji) of
his wife Pinki. They also attended the marriage of Vandana, cousin
sister of his wife Pinki. Further that, after 2-3 months, Pinki raised a
demand for nuclear family but he (DW1) took the matter on a lighter
note. After that, Pinki requested him that she wanted to pursue higher
education and purusant to her request, DW1 got her admitted in MBA

FIR No.167/11 Page No.27/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma etc.
course. Fees receipts of the said MBA course have been placed on
record as Ex.DW1/1 (running into two pages). Copy of the I card of the
deceased of MBA course issued from Sikkim Manipal University is
Ex.DW1/2. As per DW1, deceased had also prepared for the entrance
examination for various government services and he used to take her
to the centres for the said examinations. Copy of the Admit cards of
the deceased is Mark DW1/3 (running into three pages). DW1 further
deposed that he and Pinki had also attended the birthday function of
her brother i.e. Inder Koli at her parental house. In August 2011, he
and his family members also celebrated deceased's birthday at their
home and same was attended by deceased's brother Inder Koli and
her cousin sister. DW1 further deposed that Pinki had been constantly
asking him (DW1) for a nuclear family and even her mother also
asked him for separate accommodation for deceased saying that her
daughter needs privacy. DW1 however, tried to convince deceased
by saying that his mother was suffering from arthritis, therefore, he
could not leave his mother in such condition but Pinki was adamant
on her demand. DW1 further testified that he alongwith Pinki and her
family members had also gone for a religious trip to Haridwar. Even
at Haridwar deceased's parents pressurized him for a nuclear family.
After returning from Haridwar, Pinki told him that her mother was
searching a rented accommodation for them (DW1 and deceased)
near her house but he opposed her move. Before that Pinki also
expressed her desire that she wanted to join back her job for which he
and his family members had given their assent.

29.1 DW1 further deposed that in November 2011, parents of

FIR No.167/11 Page No.28/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
Pinki had a katha (religious ceremony) at their home which was duly
attended by him as well as his family members and they also used to
visit at the parental house of Pinki on festivals. Further that on
28.12.2011, Pinki entered into an argument with him for living
separately as a nuclear family and after that she went for her office.
After returning from her office, in the evening Pinki told him that her
mother had already searched a rented accommodation for them near
her parental house and from January 2012, he and Pinki had to shift to
said rented accommodation but he refused for the same upon which
deceased continued to argue with him the whole night. Even on the
next morning, Pinki repeated her demand for nuclear family. Pinki also
told him that she would not attend her office for that day. After that,
on 29.12.2011, at about 11-11.30 am, DW1 left his home to purchase
some plumbing material at Kotla Mubarakpur. He returned back to his
home at about 1-1.30 pm. After reaching his home, he knocked the
door of his bedroom for about 15 minutes but, Pinki did not respond.
When DW1 inquired the reason from his family members, they told
him that Pinki had not opened the door of her bedroom ever since he
left the house. After that, he went to the backyard of his house and
peeped inside his room from the window, he saw the deceased
hanging from the ceiling fan of the room. After hearing hue and cry
raised by DW1, his neighbour namely Sandeep also came there.
However, before Sandeep reached there, he (DW1) had broken the
window with the help of some iron object. Thereafter, DW1 took down
the dead body of his wife from the ceiling fan and unlocked the door
which was bolted from inside. With the help of one Deshraj, who was
his acquaintance, DW1 took his wife to hospital.

During investigation,

FIR No.167/11 Page No.29/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
while he and his father were in police station, IO had taken his
signatures on certain blank papers.

30. Prosecution witnesses as well defence witness were duly
cross-examined by Ld. defence counsel and Ld. Prosecutor
respectively and relevant part of their cross-examination shall be
discussed in later part of this judgment.

31. I have given my thoughtful consideration to the rival
contentions raised from both the sides and also carefully perused the
entire record.

Defence arguments

32. Ld. Defence Counsel Sh. Pradeep Nawani has vehemently
argued that prosecution has miserably failed to prove the charges
against any of the accused as the testimony of prosecution witnesses
is not reliable on account of various discrepancies and contradictions.
He further argued that even if the prosecution evidence is believed to
be true and reliable
,
in that case
also the same is far from
establishing any of the essential ingredients of the alleged offences so
as to base conviction on the same. It is further argued that
prosecution witnesses though have alleged that the deceased was
subjected to harassment on account of dowry demand but none of
them cited any specific instance when the deceased was subjected to
alleged harassment nor they even specified in what manner she was
subjected to such harassment or cruelty.
It is further argued that even
the date or occasion when the alleged demand of Rs.3 lacs was made,

FIR No.167/11 Page No.30/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
has not been disclosed by the family members of deceased. It is
further argued that prosecution has hopelessly failed to prove it on
record that the deceased was subjected to any cruelty or harassment
in connection with any demand for dowry soon before her death so as
to raise the presumption of
Section 113B
of Indian Evidence Act. He
further argued that the material on record is totally lacking to prove
any of said material facts to seek conviction for the offence
u/s 304-B

IPC.

In this regard, he has relied upon the judgment in
Hira Lal vs.
State (Govt. of NCT), Delhi
, (2003) 8 SCC 80.

32.1 Counsel further argued that even the charges for the
offence
u/s 306
IPC which were framed alternatively, have not been
proved on record as the testimony of prosecution witnesses nowhere
reflects any instigation or aiding within the meaning of
Section 107

IPC on the part of accused persons.

Arguments of Ld. Addl. Public Prosecutor

33. Per contra, Ld. Addl. PP Mr. Rakesh Mehta rebutted the
arguments by submitting that admittedly, the deceased had died
otherwise than normal circumstances within 7 years of her marriage
with accused Rahul and by clinching evidence of parents, brother and
one colleague of the deceased, prosecution has sufficiently proved on
record that soon before her death, deceased was subjected to cruelty
on account of non fulfillment of demands for money raised by the
accused persons therefore, the presumption of
Section 113B
of Indian
Evidence Act for the offence of
Section 304-B
IPC and that of
Section
113A
of Indian Evidence Act for the offence of
Section 306
IPC, charge

FIR No.167/11 Page No.31/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
for which was framed in alternate are clearly drawn in favour of the
prosecution and the defence has miserably failed to rebut said
presumption. It is further urged that in such like cases of dowry death,
it is rare to find any direct evidence because such crimes are
committed within the four corners of matrimonial house of deceased,
but in the instant case there is ample material in the form of
deceased's conversation with her parents and colleague soon before
her death and in view of the fact that said conversation is concering
the cause of her death and the circumstances of transaction which
resulted into her death, same is admissible as dying declaration
u/s
32 (1)
of Indian Evidence Act, which is an exception to hearsay
evidence. He further argued that the SMS which the deceased sent to
her colleague i.e. PW7 Jaspreet Kaur, for informing her that she had a
quarrel with her husband who also assaulted her is clear proof of the
fact that soon before death deceased was subjected to cruelty, and
said SMS has been duly proved on record by leading cogent evidence.

Court's discussion

34. Before embarking upon the evidence adduced on record, I
deem it appropriate to reproduce the relevant provisions of law for
the sake of ready reference. As noted above, the accused were
charged for the offences punishable
u/s 498A
/
IPC, Section 304-
B/34
IPC
and for
Section 306
/
IPC in alternate.

34.1
Section 498A
IPC:-Husband or relative of husband
of a woman subjecting her to cruelty -

Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a
woman, subjects such woman to cruelty shall be punished with

FIR No.167/11 Page No.32/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and
shall also be liable to fine.

Explanation- For the purpose of this section, 'cruelty' means-

(a) any willful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive
the woman to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to
life, limb or death (whether mental or physical) of the woman; or

(b) harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a
view to coercing her or any person related to her to meet any
unlawful demand for any property or valuable security or is on
account of failure by her or any person related to her to meet such
demand.

34.2 304B
IPC
. Dowry death.-

(1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily
injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within
seven years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her
death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband
or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any
demand for dowry, such death shall be called 'dowry death', and
such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her
death.

Explanation. - For the purposes of this sub-section, 'dowry' shall
have the same meaning as in
Section 2
of the Dowry Prohibition
Act, 1961 (28 of 1961)

(2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years
but which may extend to imprisonment for life.

34.3
Section 2
of Dowry Prohibition Act defines
dowry as under:

Definition of "dowry". - In this Act, 'dowry' means any property or
valuable security given or agreed to be given either directly or
indirectly-

(a) by one party to a marriage to the other party to the marriage;or

(b) by the parents of either party to a marriage or by any other
person, to either party to the marriage or to any other person, at or

FIR No.167/11 Page No.33/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
before or any time after the marriage in connection with the
marriage of the said parties, but does not include dower or mahr in
the case of persons to whom the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat)
applies.

Explanation II. - The expression 'valuable security' has the same
meaning as in
Section 30
of the Indian Penal Code."

34.4 113-B. Presumption as to dowry death.-

When the question is whether a person has committed the dowry
death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her death such
woman had been subjected by such person to cruelty or
harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, the
Court shall presume that such person had caused the dowry death.

Explanation.- For the purposes of this section, "dowry death", shall
have the same meaning as in
section 304-B
of the Indian Penal
Code (45 of 1860).

34.5 Section 306. Abetment of suicide. -

If any person commits suicide, whoever abets the commission of
such suicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall
also be liable to fine."

34.6 113-A. Presumption as to abetment of suicide by a
married woman.-

When the question is whether the commission of suicide by a
woman had been abetted by her husband or any relative of her
husband and it is shown that she had committed suicide within a
period of seven years from the date of her marriage and that her
husband or such relative of her husband had subjected her to
cruelty, the Court may presume, having regard to all the other
circumstances of the case, that such suicide had been abetted by
her husband or by such relative of her husband.

Explanation.- For the purposes of this section, "cruelty" shall have
the same meaning as in
Section 498-A
of the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860).]

FIR No.167/11 Page No.34/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
34.7 The abetment has been defined in
Section 107
IPC
and same also reads as under:-

107. Abetment of a thing.- A person abets the doing of a thing.

Who-

First.- Instigates any person to do that thing; or

Secondly.- Engages with one or more other person or persons in
any conspiracy for the doing of that thing, if an act or illegal
omission takes place in pursuance of that conspiracy, and in order
to the doing of that thing;or

Thirdly.- Intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, the doing
of that thing.

Explanation1.-A person who, by willful misrepresentation, or by
willful concealment of a material fact which he is bound to
disclose, voluntarily causes or procures, or attempts to cause or
procure, a thing to be done, is said to instigate the doing of that
thing.

Explanation2.- Whoever, either prior to or at the time of the
commission of an act, does anything in order to facilitate the
commission of that act, and thereby facilitates the commission
thereof, is said to aid the doing of that act.

35. We may now examine the evidence adduced on record to
first determine whether an offence
u/s 498A
IPC has been made out
against the accused persons. In this regard, prosecution has
examined witnesses namely Sohan Lal (father of deceased),
Chanderkala ( mother of deceased), Chiranji Lal (under of deceased),
Inder Kohli (brother of deceased) who have been examined as PW1 to
PW4 respectively.

36. Before separately discussing the testimony of said
material witnesses, I may mention here that it is an admitted position

FIR No.167/11 Page No.35/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
of prosecution case that neither the alleged demand of money was
ever raised by the accused persons directly from any of the family
members of deceased nor deceased was ever subjected to any
harassment, cruelty or ill treatment in their presence. As per
prosecution case, about alleged demand of money and harassment,
deceased had informed her parents. In view of
Section 32 (1)
of
Indian Evidence Act, such statement made by the deceased
concerning to any circumstances of transaction resulting in his/her
death is admissible under law as dying declaration but, due caution is
required to be taken before relying upon said testimony as the court
has to first satisfy that such testimony qualifies the essential
requirements of said provision for making it admissible for the
purpose of evidence.

37. PW1 Sohan Lal, father of deceased in his examination in
chief says that deceased was constantly harassed for Rs. 3 lacs as her
in laws used to demand Rs. 3 lacs for buying a house at Noida. As per
PW1, in October, 2011, deceased became pregnant. However,
accused started demanding Rs. 3 lacs and used to ask deceased to
approach her parents to arrange money. PW1 made only a general
statement that accused used to harass deceased for Rs. 3 lacs
without disclosing as to how and in what matter deceased was
allegedly subjected to harassment by her husband or in laws. Though,
PW1 alleged that pregnancy of deceased was terminated by accused
without their information but he nowhere alleged that said medical
termination of pregnancy was without deceased's consent or that it
was against her wishes. As per PW1, deceased Pinki was though

FIR No.167/11 Page No.36/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
residing with her parents at her parental home since 2nd or 3rd of
month but on 28th, her husband took her daughter directly from her
office on the assurance that he pad pacified his parents and they
would not raise any demand for money but thereafter, they
(deceased's parents) had received a phone call from deceased who
told them that she had been still harassed for Rs.3 lacs. But again,
nothing has been disclosed by PW1 as to how the accused used to
allegedly harass his daughter and on what date, time or occasion they
received said alleged call from deceased.

38. From the perusal of cross examination of PW1, it is clear
that after Roka ceremony with accused Rahul in May, 2009, parents of
deceased got the arrangement of deceased fixed with some other
person but again, in October, 2010, they initiated the talks of
marriage of deceased with accused Rahul because after Roka
ceremony, accused Rahul and deceased came closer and started
loving each other. However, PW1 categorically denied the suggestion
that it was under deceased's pressure, they had to get the deceased
married with accused Rahul. Here, I may mention that PW2, who is
the mother of deceased, in her cross examination however, gave a
contrary version as she admitted that second Roka ceremony of
deceased with accused Rahul was performed under the pressure of
deceased.

39. PW1 however, admitted that accused Rahul had got
deceased admitted for MBA. He also admitted to have invited accused
persons for katha ceremony at their residence i.e. at the parental

FIR No.167/11 Page No.37/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
home of deceased. PW1 also admitted to have not disclosed in his
statement recorded before SDM (Ex. PW1/A) or in his statement
recorded
u/s 161
Cr.P.C., regarding any demand of Rs.3 lacs or
regarding medical termination of pregnancy of deceased or regarding
alleged use of ATM card of deceased by accused Rahul but, he denied
that he had introduced said facts in his examination in chief as an
after though under legal advise.

40. Though, as per prosecution case, just after 2-3 months of
deceased's marriage, accused started harassing her, but the version
of PW1 however, shows that accused family was having cordial
relations with deceased's family, as they used to frequently visit each
other on different occasions like Holi on 19.03.2011, at birthday of
deceased's brother Inder on 02.06.2011 and on the retirement party
of deceased's uncle i.e. PW3 on 31.03.2011. Deceased with her
husband i.e. accused Rahul had accompanied the entire family of PW1
for a religious tour in Haridwar from 28.10.2011 to 31.10.2011.
Various photographs of said occasions were placed on record as Ex.
PW1/D1/D2 & PW2/D3 which were duly admitted by PW1 as well as
his wife PW2 when they were confronted with the same in their cross-
examination.

41. From the cross-examination of PW1, it is also clear that
ancestral house of accused persons was at 2-3 minutes walking
distance from the house of sister of PW1 namely Maya, but still
deceased had never complained to her Bua regarding her alleged
harassment at the hands of her in laws despite the fact that

FIR No.167/11 Page No.38/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
deceased's Bua Maya used to occasionally visit the matrimonial house
of deceased.

42. In his cross-examination, PW1 also admitted the fact that
mediator Om Prakash, PW1 and his (PW1's) brother Chiranjee Lal
(PW3) were members of Kohli Cooperative Society for last 15-20 years
and even the distance between deceased's parental house and that of
her matrimonial house was also just 2 km. In said circumstances, it is
highly improbable that deceased's parents were kept in dark about
accused Rahul's vocation or income as alleged.

43. Before proceeding to consider testimony of PW2, I may
mention here that PW1 in his statement Ex. PW1/A recorded before
SDM on the very same date of incident which forms the basis of
present FIR, has though alleged that her daughter was harassed and
assaulted on account of dowry but, there is no mention of any alleged
demand of money in the entire statement. In Ex. PW1/A, he has
simply stated that the accused were not happy with the dowry given
in the marriage and just after a month, they started harassing her and
on account of said behaviour of accused persons, the deceased had
come to her parental house where she stayed for a month and she
was taken back to her matrimonial home by her husband directly from
her office on 28.11.2011. Thereafter, her daughter informed them on
telephone that her husband had assured her that neither he himself
nor his parents would quarrel with her. As is apparently clear, there is
no mention in the entire statement regarding any demand of money
or any harassment in furtherance thereof or even with regard to

FIR No.167/11 Page No.39/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
alleged medical termination of pregnancy of the deceased. To said
extent, PW1 appears to have improved his version and upon being
confronted with said improvements during the course of cross-
examination, PW1 was unable to give any sufficient reason for not
disclosing said material facts to the SDM in his first statement. There
is no whisper in his entire statement Ex. PW1/A about any alleged
demand of money raised by the accused persons for buying any
house in Noida or forcing the deceased to seek a job after marriage. It
is nowhere alleged in said statement Ex. PW1/A or even in his
testimony before the court that deceased was ever taunted, abused
or assaulted on account of her having not brought Rs. 3 lacs or in
order to pressurize her to bring said money from her parents. None of
the family members of deceased, examined in this case as PWs has
come out with any specific instance of cruelty or harassment
allegedly meted out to the deceased either in their own presence or
their having been informed about it by the deceased.

44. Even mother of deceased, who has been examined as
PW2, also came up with a general allegation saying that after
marriage, the accused persons started harassing her daughter PInki
on account of demand of money. Further that, deceased was
pressurized to join back her employment which she had left at the
time of her marriage. As per her version, accused Rahul used to retain
the whole salary of deceased with him and used to give her meager
amount and did not allow her to retain sufficient balance in her mobile
phone.

FIR No.167/11 Page No.40/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.

45. PW2 further deposed in her examination in chief that her
daughter used to tell her that whenever she (deceased) would ask her
husband i.e. accused Rahul to live separately, he used to ask the
deceased to bring Rs. 3 lacs for taking a separate home or to ask her
parents to give them (couple) a room in their two room house at Wazir
Nagar, which was already on rent. PW2 further stated that accused
Gian and Madhu asked accused Rahul to leave deceased at their
house (parental house of deceased) as they (deceased's parents)
were not able to pay Rs. 3 lacs to accused. She further deposed that
when deceased became pregnant and was unwell, she was dropped
by her husband at her parental home, though even from there,
deceased used to go for her job and it was her husband who used to
pick and drop her for her job. On 20 th November, deceased was taken
by her husband for conducting some test but instead, accused got her
child aborted in some clinic at Lajpat Nagar without her knowledge as
she (deceased) was unconscious because of the injection given to her.

46. Here, I may mention that IO had not made any
investigation in this regard as no such fact regarding abortion of
deceased was disclosed by her parents at the time of their
statements recorded before SDM and said fact came to be disclosed
by parents of deceased only at the time of their examination in the
court.

47. As per PW2, Pinki was left at her parental home on the
same very day after abortion i.e. on 20.11.2011 and she stayed there
till 28th and on 28th November, Rahul took the deceased back to her

FIR No.167/11 Page No.41/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
matrimonial home by assuring that his parents would not raise any
demand for money but, deceased informed them that her mother in
law had however, again commented that why Rahul had brought Pinki
back to her matrimonial home. Thereafter, Pinki never visited her
parental home.

48. The above deposition of PW2 nowhere indicates that the
deceased was ever subjected to any kind of harassment or cruelty in
furtherance of alleged demand of money by any of the accused
persons. If the testimony of PW2 is read as a whole, it rather suggests
that Pinki i.e. the deceased came to live at her parental home in the
month of November because at that time, she was pregnant and was
unable to do the household work singly because her mother in law
was suffering from arthritis and therefore, her husband in order to
avoid any inconvenience to deceased sent her to her parental home
and even from there, he used to help the deceased in commuting to
the office as he used to pick and drop her from her parental home for
her job.

49. Careful perusal of deposition of PW2 also reflects that on
10.11.2011, accused Rahul and Gian Chand had attended a Katha
ceremony at parental house of deceased and at that time Pinki was
already at her parental house and prior to that, deceased and her
husband had gone for a religious tour at Haridwar between
28.10.2011 to 31.10.2011 with parental family of deceased.

50. PW2 also admitted that accused Rahul had got deceased

FIR No.167/11 Page No.42/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
admitted for MBA and she (deceased) had also appeared in SCC
examination from her matrimonial home and her husband used to
arrange for filling of forms for said examination. PW2 also admitted
that all the accused with deceased had visited them for attending
retirement party of Chiranjee Lal (brother in law of PW2) and marriage
party of Vandana (niece of PW2) and her son Inder Kohli had also
gone to deceased's matrimonial house for celebration of deceased's
first birthday after her marriage on 02.08.2011.

51. The above circumstances nowhere suggests that deceased
was feeling harassed on account of the conduct of her husband or in
laws rather it appears that the two families were enjoying cordial
relationship. Small discords in the joint families relating to the sharing
of responsibilities of the household work etc. are not uncommon and
even in the instant case, it appears that since the deceased had
started working after her marriage with accused Rahul, she was
unable to bear all the responsibilities of the household chores
especially when she was not having any helping hand as even her
mother in law was ill as she was suffering from arthritis and for said
reason deceased had insisted her husband to live separately.

52. Though in her cross-examination, PW2 denied the
suggestion that her daughter wanted to live separately with accused
Rahul as a nuclear family but, in her examination in chief, she has
made candid admission to the effect that when her daughter had
asked her husband Rahul to live separately, then her husband asked
her to bring Rs. 3 lacs to take a separate home. The said deposition of

FIR No.167/11 Page No.43/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
PW2 makes it apparently clear that deceased did not want to live in a
joint family and wanted to shift to a separate accommodation with her
husband alone. The deposition of PW2 also reflects that mother in law
of deceased i.e. accused Madhu was suffering from arthritis and was
unable to do the household work and therefore, the whole burden of
household work was upon the deceased. Even a cousin sister of
deceased's husband namely Ginny who used to live with them, also
did not use to help the deceased.

53. From the above circumstances, it appears that deceased
was not willing to stay in the joint family and used to ask her husband
to live separately. Even as per the defence taken by the accused
persons, on the preceding night of alleged incident, deceased had
insisted her husband to shift to a rented accommodation near her
parental house and when her husband did not agree for the same ,
they entered into a fight.

54. It is pertinent to note here that as per PW2, deceased and
her husband Rahul had visited to Haridwar with deceased's parental
family and after coming back from there, deceased fell sick as she
was pregnant and she was left at their home by Rahul as her mother
in law used to comment that if deceased had fallen ill, who would do
the household work. From said statement, it appears that since the
deceased was working even at that time, her husband showed
concern about her health because his own mother was suffering from
arthritis and therefore, in order to avoid any kind of hassles to the
deceased in the matrimonial home on account of her ill health, he left

FIR No.167/11 Page No.44/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
the deceased to her parental home for few days and even from there
he used to pick and drop her for her job. From the deposition of the
parents of deceased, there is nothing to suggest that in the month of
November, deceased was left at her parental home on account of any
illegal demand or any harassment in furtherance thereof.

55. At one point, PW2 in her examination in chief deposed
that it was deceased's husband who asked her to bring Rs. 3 lacs to
take a separate home that too when deceased asked him to live
separately, showing that demand of Rs.3 lacs was raised only by
husband. But, in her subsequent examination, PW2 deposed that in
November, after staying at her parental home for 8 days deceased
returned to her matrimonial home with her husband on the assurance
of her husband that his parents would not raise any demand of money
indicating that the demand for money was raised by the in laws. On
the other hand, in the statement Ex. PW1/A of the father of deceased
made to SDM on 29.12.2011, there is no whisper of any such demand
of money as he deposed that the deceased joined back her
matrimonial home on 28.11.2011, on the assurance of her husband
that neither he nor his parents would quarrel with her. In said
statement Ex. PW1/A, PW1 nowhere mentioned that reason of alleged
quarrel was any demand of money or a house.

56. From the above discrepant version of PW2, it is not clear
who actually raised the alleged demand of Rs.3 lacs. Even otherwise,
the alleged demand even if believed to have been raised by accused
Rahul, the same was raised only when deceased asked him to live

FIR No.167/11 Page No.45/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
separately. For the purpose of buying a separate accommodation, if
the husband asked deceased to arrange Rs. 3 lacs from her parents,
that will not amount to a demand of dowry within the meaning of

Section 2
of Dowry Prohibition Act.

57. Admittedly, husband of deceased was staying with his
parents in a government accommodation and admittedly deceased
had been asking him to live separately, then in such a situation, if the
husband told her to ask her parents to allow them to live in their
house which deceased's parents were owning at Wazir Nagar, the
same will not amount to a dowry demand. Though a wife has all the
right to be maintained by her husband but, it is never beyond the
means, status and resources of her husband. If the husband was not
capable of arranging a separate accommodation and in such a
situation if his wife was still insisting him for a separate home, the act
of the husband to ask his wife to bring Rs. 3 lacs for arranging a
separate home for her, shall not amount to dowry demand within the
meaning of
Section 304B
IPC.

58. Furthermore, for attracting the provisions of
Section 498A

IPC or for that matter,
Section 304B
IPC, there has to be cruelty and
harassment in furtherance of unlawful demand of dowry.

59. For establishing the cruelty or harassment within the
meaning of
Section 498A
IPC, the harassment or cruelty must be
unabated, incessant, persistent and grave in nature and same must
be with intention to force woman to commit suicide or to fulfill illegal

FIR No.167/11 Page No.46/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
demand of dowry. Every act of cruelty or harassment is not made a
crime
u/s 498A
IPC. A solitary incident cannot be interpreted to be
sufficient evidence of cruelty or harassment attracting Section 498A
because
in that case
, incessant, persistent and sufficiently grave
cruelty as is likely to drive a woman to a point of desperation leaving
her with no option except to think about suicide will be absent. The
cruelty and harassment envisaged
u/s 498A
IPC must be unabated,
continuous or recurring and one or two incidents casually taking
place, will not be sufficient to attract said provision of law.
In
Indrasing M. Raol vs. State of Gujarat, II (2002) DMC 239, it
was held by the Hon'ble Gujarat High Court that:-

"17. A woman would prefer to end her life, if continuous or
recurring unabated harassment or cruelty grave in nature, is
intolerable or unendurable. Highly sensitive, impulsive,
reckless, or touchy woman may on one incident end her life,
but that exception to the rule is not envisaged by the
section. It should also be stated that after marriage
sometimes emotional disorder is created, and that results
into frustration and pessimism. A woman sometime
becomes psychotic and develops tendency to end her life. A
woman being highly sensitive and sentimental, or reckless,
or if tired of her life either because her dreamt expectations
are not satisfied or found to be the mirage, or for any other
reason may become dejected and desperate and may
develop suicidal tendency, and end her life. The duty of the
Court is also to make necessary endeavour to ascertain why
the husband or his relatives had as alleged turned up their
nose at the victim and resorted to coarse cruelty, divorcing
civility, delicacy and refinement. Having regard to the facts
and circumstances on record, if Court finds that the misdeed
or wrong on the part of the accused is the compelling
reaction of the real or unjust or fancied provocative act of
the victim, i.e., abetted counter-action or wrong, the same
even if uncivil or Barbaric will not fall within the ambit of
cruelty envisaged by Section 498-A, for required intention
would be lacking although the same may attract any other
penal provision.
In short, therefore, intention to drive the
woman to commit suicide being the essential ingredient, the

FIR No.167/11 Page No.47/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
endeavour of the Court must be to find out having regard to
the facts and circumstances on record, what the intention of
the accused was? I will, therefore, proceed to ascertain what
could be the intention of the appellant when he, on mid-
night as alleged, behaved stormily or roughly, though it is
clear that the alleged solitary incident will not attract
Section 498A."

60. In the instant case, except the general allegation of
harassment, there is absolutely nothing in the testimony of
prosecution witnesses as to how and in what manner the deceased
was subjected to harassment by the accused persons. There is no
allegation in the testimony of any of the family members of deceased
that deceased was subjected to any such cruelty physical or mental in
furtherance of demand of dowry or with an intention to drive her to
commit suicide.

61. Even the SMS allegedly sent by deceased to her colleague
PW7 Jaspreet Kaur at her mobile, on which prosecution has heavily
relied upon to show "cruelty soon before death" nowhere mentions
that the alleged assault/beatings which deceased was given by her
husband, was in furtherance of demand of dowry. There is nothing to
suggest why the couple had a quarrel on the fateful day. The SMS
reads "Mere husband ke saath mera Jhagra ho gaya or mujhe marra
bhi". Though the message mentions that she was hit by her husband
but, it does not disclose the manner of alleged assault on her nor that
what was the reason of their quarrel. Postmortem report Ex. PW5/A is
not indicative of any external marks of injury on the dead body of
deceased.

FIR No.167/11 Page No.48/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.

62. Except in said SMS, there is absolutely no other
circumstance brought on record by the prosecution to show that
deceased was ever beaten up in any manner by any of the accused
persons either on account of demand of dowry or on any other
account during her stay in the matrimonial house. Except bald
allegations of harassment or cruelty, there is no specific allegation in
this regard in the testimony of any of the family members of
deceased. Even PW3 Chiranji Lal has raised bald, unspecific and
general allegation of harassment that too is nothing but a hearsay
evidence because as per his statement Ex. PW3/A, Pinki used to
complain about her harassment at the hands of her husband and in
laws to her father Sohan Lal. Whereas, PW3 though in his examination
before the court alleged that the accused had raised demand of a
house and cash of Rs.3 lacs for the purpose of purchasing a house
but, there is no whisper of any such allegation in his statement Ex.
PW3/A recorded before SDM.

63. I have also perused the testimony of deceased's brother
Inder Kohli who has been examined as PW4. As per his deposition, her
sister used to call him after marriage and informed that her father in
law, mother in law and brother in law had been harassing her on
account of dowry. It is interesting to note that none of the other family
members had uttered a word against the brother in law of the
deceased and it was PW4 who first time came up with the allegation
even against the brother in law. He further deposed in his
examination in chief that deceased used to tell him that whenever
deceased told her husband about said conduct of her in laws, even

FIR No.167/11 Page No.49/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
her husband, her husband scolded her and used to suspect her.
Further, on the occasion of Rakshabandan when the deceased visited
their house, she complained about displeasure of accused persons on
account of insufficiency of dowry given in her marriage.

64. It is interesting to note that neither in his statement Ex.
PW4/A made to the SDM on 29.12.2011 nor in his deposition recorded
before the court, PW4 disclosed anything about any demand of Rs.3
lacs or a house at Noida by the accused persons nor there is any
specific allegation relating to cruelty or harassment. Though in the
statement Ex. PW4/A it was alleged that the husband used to
physically assault her whenever deceased complained about the
conduct of her in laws in taunting her for not bringing sufficient dowry
but, his deposition in the court is totally silent about any such
allegation. The allegation of harassment are bald and general as
neither the manner of harassment has been disclosed nor any specific
instance has been mentioned by PW4 in his deposition. Rather in his
cross-examination, he admitted to have celebrated his birthday on
02.06.2011 with accused Rahul at the parental home of the deceased,
his having joined the deceased and her husband in birthday
celebration of deceased on 02.08.2011 at her matrimonial home at
Sadiq Nagar and further the deceased and the accused Rahul fhaving
joined them in the religious trip to Haridwar in the month of October,
2011. He also admitted various photographs of said occasions which
were shown to him by the defence counsel during his cross
examination, as Ex. PW4/D2, D3 & D4.

FIR No.167/11 Page No.50/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.

65. The above deposition of PW4 rather shows that the two
families were at good terms and even the couple had been enjoying
warm relationship as the husband had been taking due care of his
wife i.e. the deceased even at the time when she was staying at her
parental home, as it was he, who used to pick and drop her for her
job. It was husband only who got the deceased admitted for MBA and
used to take her to examination centre for appearing in different
exams.

66. It is vehemently argued on behalf of
complainant/prosecution that on fateful day, deceased was subjected
to beatings by her husband in furtherance of demand of money,
which compelled the deceased to take extreme step of suicide. In this
regard, prosecution has relied upon the testimony of PW7 & PW8
(friend of deceased Jaspreet and employer Anil Kumar Goyal) who
have deposed regarding deceased having sent a message on the
mobile phone of PW7 informing her that she had a quarrel with her
husband and her husband had also hit her. It is further argued that
the said text message sent by deceased from her mobile phone to
mobile phone of her friend has been duly proved in view of the
version of PW7, PW8, PW20 and IO/PW22 and the FSL report Ex.
PW20/A & B.

67. However, as already noted above, said text message
Ex.PW7/A nowhere mentions that a quarrel had occurred in
furtherance of any unlawful demand of dowry.
In said message,
deceased wrote " Mere husband ke sath mera Jhagra ho gaya hai aur

FIR No.167/11 Page No.51/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
mujhe maara bhi". It nowhere shows that how she was hit or beaten
up by her husband or whether it was just a slap and fist blow or with
some object, nothing is clear from the text message. Considering the
fact that neither the postmortem report is indicative of any external
injury showing any physical assault on the deceased nor the
prosecution has brought on record any cogent evidence to prove any
previous history of physical assaults, the said SMS is not sufficient to
show that the deceased was subjected to any physical cruelty of the
extent envisaged
u/s 498A
IPC, for raising any presumption of
Section
113A
of Indian Evidence Act for attracting the provisions of
Section
IPC.

68. The general allegation of harassment without describing
the exact conduct of accused will not be sufficient to attract the
provisions of Section 498A or 304-B
IPC
.
In this regard, I also refer the
judgment in
Amar Singh vs. State of Rajasthan
2010 (4)
Criminal Court Cases 234 (SC) wherein it was held that " a
prosecution witness who merely uses the word "harassed" or
"tortured" and does not describe the exact conduct of accused which,
according to him, amounted to harassment or torture may not be
believed by the court in cases
u/s 498A
and
304-B
IPC."

69. One cannot lose sight of the fact that it is one of the
fundamental principles of criminal jurispuradance that an accused is
presumed to be innocent till he is proved guilty. It is equally well
settled that suspicion however, strong can never take the place of
proof. There is indeed a long distance between the accused "may

FIR No.167/11 Page No.52/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
have committed the offence" and "must have committed the offence"

which must be transversed by the prosecution by adducing reliable
and cogent evidence. Presumption of innocence has been recognized
as a human right which cannot be washed away. Reliance placed on
Kailash Guar & Ors. State of Aasam (2012) 2 SCC 34.

70. As per postmortem report Ex.PW5/A, except a ligature
mark pointing upward and one old scar over mid forhead, no other
external antemortem injury was found present over the body of
deceased and cause of death was asphyxia due to ante mortem
hanging and time since death was about a day prior to postmortem.
As autopsy, as per PM report started at 11:55 am on 30.12.2011, it
suggests that death had occurred at about 12:00 am on 29.12.2011.
There is nothing on record to show that viscera of deceased was
preserved by the Autopsy surgeon for chemical analysis so as to rule
out the possibility of concomitant intoxication or poisoning.

71. As regard the allegations of mental cruelty meted out to
deceased by her husband in leaving his job just after few months of
marriage, asking deceased to seek job after marriage, aborting the
deceased's pregnancy without her consent and knowledge, not
providing her with the sufficient money for meeting her day to day
expenses and also raising doubt that she was having extra marital
affairs, I may mention that on careful reading of testimony of PW1 to
PW4 as well as their statements recorded before the SDM, their
depositions in this regard are found materially discrepant and do not
corroborate with each other and as such not found sufficient for

FIR No.167/11 Page No.53/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
attracting the above provisions.

72. In the context of
Section 306
IPC, charges for which were
framed against the accused in alternate, it would be useful to refer
the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Randhir Singh vs. State
of Punjab MANU/SC/0881/2004 : (2004) 13 SCC 129wherein it
was held that
"abetment involves a mental process of instigating a
person or intentionally aiding that person in doing of a
thing. In cases of conspiracy also, it would involve that
mental process of entering into conspiracy for the doing
of that thing. More active role which can be described as
instigating or aiding the doing of a thing is required
before a person can be said to be abetting the
commission of offence
u/s 306
IPC.

73. The marital discord or differences between husband or
wife or any quarrel with the husband or in laws would not by itself,
without anything more be sufficient to attract the provisions of
Section 306 r/w
Section 107
IPC. The burden of proof is not altered by

Section 113 A
of Indian Evidence Act, as held by Hon'ble Apex Court
in AIR 1998 SC titled as
State of West Bengal vs. Orilal Jaiswal
& Ors.
wherein, it was held that in a criminal trial however, intriguing
may be the facts and circumstances of the case, the charges made
against the accused must be proved beyond all reasonable doubts
and the requirement of proof cannot lie in the realms of surmises and
conjectures. The requirement of proof beyond reasonable doubt does
not stand altered even after introduction of
Section 498A
IPC and

Section 113A
of Indian Evidence Act.

FIR No.167/11 Page No.54/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.

74. Here, it is also pertinent to note that even in Ex. PW1/A,
the statement of Sohan Lal, recorded by SDM on 29.12.2011, which
formed basis of present FIR, he simply stated that accused persons
were not happy with the dowry given in the marriage and just after
one month of marriage, they started harassing their daughter and on
account of said behaviour, his daughter came to her parental home in
the month of November, 2011 and after staying there for about one
month, she was taken to her matrimonial house by her husband on
the assurance that neither he himself nor his parents would quarrel
with her. There is not a single utterance of any demand for money or
any harassment in furtherance thereof.

75. Cruelty is defined under two clauses of Explanation to
Section 498A. Clause (a) talks about willful conduct of such nature as
is likely to drive a woman to commit suicide or to cause grave injury
or danger to life, limb or health. As per clause (b), it also includes
harassment of woman in furtherance of any unlawful demand for any
property or valuable security or on account of failure of such woman
or any person related to her to meet such demand.

76. In the instant case, testimony of prosecution witnesses is
totally lacking to reflect any such willful conduct of accused in the
nature to drive the deceased to commit suicide. Mere allegation that
deceased was pressurized to bring money for fulfillment of her desire
of a separate home is not sufficient unless it is proved that deceased
was put to some harassment mental or physical on account of said
reason.

FIR No.167/11 Page No.55/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.

77. As regard the deposition of Ms. Jaspreet Kaur (PW7)
although there is no legal bar in relying upon her testimony relating to
her having received a written communication from the deceased vide
SMS Ex. PW7/A on her mobile phone from deceased's mobile phone,
immediately soon before deceased death, especially when the same
was concerning the circumstances of transactions which resulted into
deceased's death, but, as noted above, even said SMS nowhere
suggests what was the cause of quarrel between the couple and how
and in what manner she was allegedly assaulted because the
postmortem report is not indicting any external injury on the body of
the deceased nor there is any history disclosed even by the family
members of deceased to suggest that deceased was ever subjected
to physical assaults on any occasion after her marriage, either by the
husband or his parents. The SMS also does not mention anything
about any illegal/unlawful demand of dowry or that the alleged
quarrel or assault by the husband of deceased was in furtherance of
any such demand.

78.
Section 304-B
IPC embodies a deemed fiction in
contradiction with the cardinal principle of presumption of innocence
in favour of an accused. The legislature has applied the concept of
deemed fiction in
Section 304-B
IPC where the husband or his
relatives shall be deemed to have caused death of a woman once the
prosecution proves its case with regard to basic ingredients of
Section
304-B
IPC.
In other words, the offence shall be deemed to have been
committed by fiction of law once the prosecution proves the other

FIR No.167/11 Page No.56/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
ingredients of
Section 304-B
IPC and in that event, the court will
presume by deemed fiction of law that the husband or the relatives
complained of, has caused her death. But of course, the deemed
fiction would introduce a rebutable presumption which can be
rebutted by the husband and his relatives by leading their defence
and proving that the ingredients of Section 304-B were not satisfied.

While referencing to raising of presumption u/s 304-B of the Code,
Hon'ble Apex Court in
Kaliyaperumal vs. State of T.N.
(2004) 9
SCC 157, stated the following ingredients which should be satisfied:

(1) The question before the court must be whether the
accused has committed the dowry death of a
woman, (This means that the presumption can be
raised only if the accused is being tried for the
offence under
Section 304-B
IPC).

(2) The woman was subjected to cruelty or harassment
by her husband or his relatives.

(3) Such cruelty or harassment was for, or in connection
with any demand for dowry.

(4) Such cruelty or harassment was soon before her
death.

79. In the light of the above essential ingredients, for
constituting an offence under Section 304-B of the Code, the Court
has to attach specific significance to the time of alleged cruelty and
harassment to which the victim was subjected to and the time of
her death, as well as whether the alleged demand of dowry was in
connection with the marriage. Once these ingredients are satisfied,
it would be called the "dowry death" and then, by deemed fiction of

FIR No.167/11 Page No.57/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
law, the husband or the relatives would be deemed to have
committed that offence.

Reliance placed on the judgment of Hon'ble
Apex Court in
Ashok Kumar vs. State of Haryana
, 2010 (12)
SCC 350.

80. As is evident from record, the accused have been tried
before this court for the offence of dowry death
u/s 304-B
/
IPC
alongwith other offences
u/s 498A
/
IPC. Hence, the first ingredient
of the offence i.e. the trial of the accused before the court should be
for the offence of
section 304-B
IPC is satisfied. Now, comes to the
second question as to whether deceased was subjected to
harassment or cruelty by the accused persons. However, said
question has already been decided herein above while dealing with
the charges of offence under
Section 498A
IPC wherein, it has been
held that prosecution has miserably failed to prove that the
deceased was subjected to any cruelty or harassment at the hands
of accused persons.

81. Secondly, as already noted above, there is no cogent or
reliable evidence even with regard to alleged demand of Rs.3 lacs,
but even otherwise, it was not in connection with the marriage of
deceased. As per prosecution own case, the same was raised by
deceased's husband only when deceased insisted him for a
separate house as she was not willing to live in the joint family with
her in laws. As per PW1's own version, deceased's husband was a
man of insufficient means as he was unemployed at the time of
death of deceased.
In said circumstances, even if it is believed that

FIR No.167/11 Page No.58/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.

deceased was asked to bring money for a separete home, same
cannot be treated as demand of 'dowry' within the meaning of

Section 304B
IPC especially in the light of judgment in
Appasaheb
& Anr. vs. State of Maharashtra
(supra) wherein it was held
that a demand for money on account of some financial stringency or
for meeting some urgent domestic expenses cannot be termed as a
demand for dowry within a meaning of
Section 304-B
IPC. Here the
husband was not willing to leave his parents and it was the
deceased who had been insisting him for a separate
accommodation and it is only for fulfillment of deceased's desire for
a separate accommodation, if the husband asked her to arrange
money from her parents or to ask them to arrange for them (couple)
for some alternative accommodation, the same cannot be treated
as a demand for dowry within the meaning of Section 304B or

Section 498A
IPC.

82. Since the first two essential ingredients of
Section 304-B

IPC i.e. the cruelty and harassment in connection with demand of
dowry, have not been established on record, the third question
whether such cruelty was soon before death, need not to be
considered.

83. In the backdrop of said circumstances, prosecution failed
to establish even the charges of
Section 304 B
IPC against any of
the accused persons.

84. Now, comes to the question of consideration of charges of

FIR No.167/11 Page No.59/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.

Section 306
IPC.

In the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in case
titled as
Hans Raj v. State of Haryana
(2004) 12 SCC 257,
wherein Hon'ble Apex Court has examined the scope of
Section
113A
of the Evidence Act vis a vis
sections 306
,
,
498A
IPC and
held that:-

"Unlike
Section 113B
of the Evidence Act, a statutory
presumption does not arise by operation of law merely on
the proof of circumstances enumerated in
Section 113A
of
the Evidence Act. This Court held that, under
Section 113A

of the Evidence Act, the prosecution has to first establish
that the woman concerned committed suicide within a
period of seven years from the date of her marriage and
that her husband has subject her to cruelty. Even though
those facts are established, the court is not bound to
presume that suicide has been abetted by her husband.
Section 113A, therefore, gives discretion to the court to
raise such presumption having regard to all other
circumstances of the case, which means that where the
allegation is of cruelty, it can consider the nature of cruelty
to which the woman was subjected, having regard to the
meaning of the word 'cruelty' in
Section 498-A
IPC."

85.
In
Pinakin Mahipatray Rawal vs. State of Gujarat

(2013) 10 SCC 48, the Hon'ble Apex Court has again examined the
scope of
Section 113A
of the Evidence Act and reiterated the legal
position that the legislative mandate of
Section 113A
of the Evidence
Act is that if a woman commits suicide within seven years of her
marriage and it is shown that her husband or any relative of her
husband had subjected her to cruelty defined in
Section 498A
IPC, the
Court may presume, having regard to all other circumstances of the
case, that such suicide had been abetted by the husband or such
person.

The Court held that, though a presumption could be drawn,
the burden of proof of showing that such an offence has been

FIR No.167/11 Page No.60/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
committed by the accused under Seciton 498-A
IPC
is on the
prosecution. The Court held that the burden is on the prosecution to
establish the fact that the deceased committed suicide and the
accused abetted the suicide.

86. Whereas, in the instant case neither the cruelty within the
meaning of
Section 498A
IPC has been established on record by the
prosecution so as to seek presumption of
Section 113A
of Indian
Evidence Act, nor there is any other circumstances on record to
indicate that accused had abetted the suicide. The alleged conduct of
accused in harassing the deceased by raising demand of money for a
separate house, even otherwise is not sufficient to bring the case
within ambit of
Section 107
IPC, as the material on record is
completely lacking to prove in what manner the deceased was put to
alleged harassment by the accused persons.

87.
In
Ramesh Kumar vs. State of Chhatisgarh
(2001)
9SCC 618 , Hon'ble Apex Court examined different shades of the
meaning of "instigation" defined in
sec. 107
IPC as under:-

"20. Instigation is to goad, urge forward, provoke, incite or
encourage to do 'an act'. To satisfy the requirement of
instigation though it is not necessary that actual words must
be used to that effect or what constitutes instigation must
necessarily and specifically be suggestive of the
consequence. Yet a reasonable certainty to incite the
consequence must be capable of being spelt out. The
present one is not a case where the accused had by his acts
or omission or by a continued course of conduct created
such circumstances that the deceased was left with no
other option except to commit suicide in which case an
instigation may have been inferred. A word uttered in the fit
of anger or emotion without intending the consequences to
actually follow cannot be said to be instigation."

FIR No.167/11 Page No.61/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.

88.
In
State of W.B. v. Orilal Jaiswal
, (1994) 1 SCC 73,
the Hon'ble Apex Court has cautioned that the court should be
extremely careful in assessing the facts and circumstances of each
case and the evidence adduced in the trial for the purpose of finding
whether the cruelty meted out to the victim had in fact induced her to
end the life by committing suicide. If it appears to the court that a
victim committing suicide was hypersensitive to ordinary petulance,
discord and differences in domestic life quite common to the society
to which the victim belonged and such petulance, discord and
differences were not expected to induce a similarly circumstanced
individual in a given society to commit suicide, the conscience of the
court should not be satisfied for basing a finding that the accused
charged of abetting the offence of suicide should be found guilty.

89. In the instant case, accused Rahul examined himself as
DW1 wherein he has stated that after 2-3 months, Pinki raised a
demand for nuclear family but he (DW1) took the matter on a lighter
note. After that, Pinki requested him that she wanted to pursue higher
education and pursuant to her request, DW1 got her admitted in MBA
course. DW1 further deposed that Pinki had been constantly asking
him (DW1) for a nuclear family and even her mother also asked him
for a separate accommodation for deceased saying that her daughter
needs privacy. DW1 however, tried to convince deceased by saying
that his mother was suffering from arthritis, therefore, he could not
leave his mother in such condition but Pinki was adamant on her
demand. DW1 further testified that he alongwith Pinki and her family

FIR No.167/11 Page No.62/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
members had also gone for a religious trip to Haridwar. Even at
Haridwar deceased's parents pressurized him for a nuclear family.
After returning from Haridwar, Pinki told him that her mother was
searching a rented accommodation for them (DW1 and deceased)
near her house but he opposed her move. Before that Pinki also
expressed her desire that she wanted to join back her job for which he
and his family members had given their assent.

90. DW1 further deposed that on 28.12.2011, Pinki entered
into an argument with him for living separately as a nuclear family
and after that she went for her office. After returning from her office,
in the evening Pinki told him that her mother had already searched a
rented accommodation for them near her parental house and from
January 2012, he and Pinki had to shift to said rented accommodation
but he refused for the same upon which deceased continued to argue
with him the whole night. Even on the next morning, Pinki repeated
her demand for nuclear family. Pinki also told him that she would not
attend her office for that day. After that, on 29.12.2011, at about 11-
11.30 am, DW1 left his home to purchase some plumbing material at
Kotla Mubarakpur.
He returned back to his home at about 1-1.30 pm.
After reaching his home, he knocked the door of his bedroom for
about 15 minutes but, Pinki did not respond. When DW1 inquired the
reason from his family members, they told him that Pinki had not
opened the door of her bedroom ever since he left the house. After
that, he went to the backyard of his house and peeped inside his
room from the window, he saw the deceased hanging from the ceiling
fan of the room. After hearing hue and cry raised by DW1, his

FIR No.167/11 Page No.63/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
neighbour namely Sandeep also came there. However, before
Sandeep reached there, he (DW1) had broken the window with the
help of some iron object. Thereafter, DW1 took down the dead body
of his wife from the ceiling fan and unlocked the door which was
bolted from inside. With the help of one Deshraj, who was his
acquaintance, DW1e took his wife to hospital. During investigation,
while he and his father were in police station, IO had taken his
signatures on certain blank papers.

91. The defence plea also find supports from the testimony of
PW10 Sandeep who has also deposed that he had never seen any
fight between the couple and even on the fateful day, when he heard
noise coming from the accused's house he reached to the house of
accused Rahul where he found Pinki was on the bed and all family
members were crying.

92. From the above material on record, I am of the considered
view that there was no abetment on the part of accused persons in
commission of suicide by the deceased as alleged by the prosecution.
The defence plea that fight occurred on account of deceased's
consistent demand for separate accommodation also seems probable
in view of deposition of deceased's mother wherein she also admitted
that her daughter had been asking her husband for separate
accommodation. As such, neither the prosecution has been able to
prove the 'cruelty' within the meaning of
Section 498A
IPC on the part
of accused persons so as to attract the presumption of
Section 113A

of Indian Evidence Act nor the material on record is sufficient to even

FIR No.167/11 Page No.64/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.
make out a case of abetment within the meaning of
Section 107
IPC.

93. Having regard to above discussion, prosecution has
miserably failed to bring home the guilt against any of the accused for
any of the alleged offences. Accordingly, all accused persons are
acquitted of all the offences punishable
u/s 498A
/
304B
/
/
IPC.
Bail bond in terms of
Section 437-A
Cr.P.C. are taken on record. File be
consigned to record room.

Announced in open Court
on 12.07.2018

(Sunena Sharma)
Additional Sessions Judge-03, (South)
Saket Courts, New Delhi

Digitally signed

John by John Doe

Date:

2018.07.13

Doe 16:15:36
+0530

FIR No.167/11 Page No.65/65

St. Vs. Rahul Verma
etc.