Supreme Court of India

Keshav Chandra Joshi And Ors. Etc vs Union Of India And Ors on 6 November, 1990

Equivalent citations: 1991 AIR 284, 1990 SCR SUPL. (2) 573, AIR 1991 SUPREME COURT 284, 1991 LAB. I. C. 216, (1991) 2 SERVLJ 42, (1991) 1 APLJ 45.2, 1992 (1) SCC(SUPP) 272, 1992 SCC (SUPP) 1 272, 1993 SCC (L&S) 694, (1991) 1 PAT LJR 80, (1992) 8 SERVLR 636, (1993) 24 ATC 545

Author:
K. Ramaswamy

Bench:
K. Ramaswamy
,
Rangnath Misra
,
M.M. Punchhi

PETITIONER:
KESHAV CHANDRA JOSHI AND ORS. ETC.

Vs.

RESPONDENT:

UNION OF INDIA AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT06/11/1990

BENCH:

RAMASWAMY, K.
BENCH:

RAMASWAMY, K.
MISRA, RANGNATH (CJ)
PUNCHHI, M.M.

CITATION:

1991 AIR 284		 1990 SCR Supl. (2) 573
1992 SCC Supl. (1) 272 1990 SCALE (2)951

ACT:

U.P. Forest Service Rules, 1952: Rules 3(h),
5(a)(b)--Appendix 'A' & 'B'--6, 24 and 27.
Service Law--Seniority--Assistant Conservators of	For-
est-Direct recruits	 and	 promotees--Fixation	 of
seniority--Appointment	of promotees on ad hoc basis as a
stop gap arrangement and dehors the rules--Promotees holding
posts continuously for a long period-Continuous length of ad
hoc service from the date of	initial	 appointment-Whether
should be counted towards seniority.
Rules relating to 'Conditions of	 service'--Power of
Governor to relax--Consultation by Governor	with public
Service	 Commission is mandatory--Word 'may' in Rule 27	 has
been used in the context of discharge of duty--It must be
read as 'shall'.

'Rules of recruitment' and	 'Conditions	 of
service'--Distinction between--Rule 5(a)(b) and Appendix 'A'
& 'B' are basic rules of recruitment and not subject to Rule

27.

Promotees appointed on ad hoc basis and	 dehors	 the
Rules-Allowing	the promotees	to officiate for a	long
period--Whether	 appointment should be deemed to have	been
made in relaxation of the Rules.

HEADNOTE:

Under U.P. Forest Service Rules, 1952 recruitment to the
posts of Assistant conservators of Forest was made from	 two
sources, namely, by direct recruitment, under Rule 5(a) read
with Appendix	'A', and by promotion of permanent Forest
Rangers, under Rule 5(b) read with Appendix 'B'. Rule 6 of
the rules provided that not more than 25% of the total
number of posts shall be filled by promotion.
The petitioners (promotees) were appointed to the posts
of Forest Rangers. Due to pendency of legal	 proceedings
there was no direct recruitment to the posts of Assistant
Conservators of Forest under Rule
5(a) till 1974 and even thereafter. The petitioners-promo-
tees were appointed on the posts of Assistant	Conservators
of Forest on ad hoc basis, between March 13, 1974 and Novem-
ber 21, 1981 subject to direct recruitment and they	were
continuing temporarily on ad hoc basis for varying period of
5 to 12 years. With effect from 1st May, 1975 the ratio of
25% recruitment of promotees under Rule 6 was increased to
33 1/3%. In the meanwhile the direct recruits	 under	Rule
5(a) were appointed on probation to substantive vacancies.

When their claim was ripe for consideration as Deputy	Con-
servators of forest, the petitioners claiming seniority over
them filed Writ Petitions in this Court contending (i)	that
though	the promotees were appointed on ad hoc basis due to
non-availability of direct recruits yet they were continuing
for well over 5 to 12 years discharging the same duties,
drawing	 the same scale of pay without any reversion; their
posts were not fortuitous, nor stop gap. Consequently their
entire continuous length of service from the dates of their
initial promotion should be counted towards their seniority;

(ii) since the promotees were allowed to officiate for a
long period they must be deemed to have been appointed in
relaxation of the rules of recruitment under Rule 27 of	 the
rules by the Governor.

On	behalf of the direct recruits it was contended	 (i)
since the appointment of the promotees was on ad hoc basis
and not on the basis of merit as per rules they have no
right to the posts. Consequently the service	rendered by
them from the dates of initial promotion till date of	sub-
stantive appointment being fortuitous	 cannot	 be counted
towards	 seniority; (ii) since the promotees were appointed
in excess of the prescribed quota in Rule 6, they should be
pushed	down to the vacancies that had arisen in each	year
above the direct recruits as per the ratio as the promotees
were not entitled to claim seniority from the initial dates
of their respective promotions; (iii) that the power of
relaxation in Rule 27 was only in respect of conditions of
service and not relating to recruitment or promotion.
Disposing the petitions, this Court,
HELD: 1. Under rule 5 read with Rule 3(h) of the	U.P.
Forest	Service Rules, 1952 a member of the service means a
person,	 be it direct recruit under rule 5(a)	or promotee
under Rule 5(b), appointed in a substantive capacity to	 the
service	 as per the provisions of the rules. In order to
become	a member of the service he must satisfy	 two condi-
tions, namely, the appointment must be in substantive capac-
ity and the appointment has to be to the post in the service
according to rules and
within	the quota to the substantive vacancy. There exists
marked	distinction between appointment in a	 substantive
capacity and appointment to the substantive post. Therefore,
the membership to the service must be preceded by an order
of appointment	 to the post validly made by the Governor.
Then only he becomes member of the service. Any other	con-
struction would be violation of the rules.

2.	Employees appointed purely on ad hoc or	 officiating
basis due to administrative exigencies, even though contin-
ued for a long spell, do not become the members of	 the
service unless the Governor appoints them in accordance with
the rules and so they are not entitled to count the entire
length of their continuous officiating or fortuitous service
towards their seniority. Reckoning continuous officiating of
ad hoc promotion would enable the less privileged to excel
their latent capabilities in the cadre post.

Narendra Chadha v. Union of India
, [1986] 1 S.C.R.	211;
Baleshwardas v. State of U.P., [1981] 1 S.C.R. 449;
N.K.
Chauhan v. State of Gujarat
, [1977] 1
S.C.R. 1037 and Direct
Recruits Class 11 Engg. Officers' Association v. State of
Maharashtra
, [1990] 2 S.C.C. 715; A.J. Patel & Ors. v. State
of Gujarat & Ors., A.I.R. 1965 Guj.
23 (FB): referred to.
Masoor Akhtar Khan & Ors. v. State of M.P. & Ors.,	J.T.
1990 3S.C. 295; followed.

A.K. Kraipak & Ors. etc. v. Union of India & Ors.,
[1970] 1 S.C.R. 457; cited.

2.1	 In the instant case due to exigencies	 of service
temporary promotions against	substantive vacancies	were
made. It is undoubted that preceding their promotion, an ad
hoc Committee	had considered the cases of the promotees.
Admittedly seniority subject to rejection of unfit was	 the
criteria, followed in the selection.	The selection	was,
therefore, in	defiance of and dehors Rule 5(b) read	with
Appendix 'B'. The promotions were on ad hoc basis pending
direct	recruitment and were in excess of the	 quota	pre-
scribed under rule 6. By no stretch of imagination it could
be said that the promotions were made to a substantive	post
in accordance with the rules. Therefore, the promotees do
not hold the post in substantive capacity. Accordingly their
continuous length of ad hoc service from the date of initial
appointment cannot be counted towards seniority.
3.	The pre-requisite of the .right to inclusion in a
common	list of seniority is that all those who	 claim	that
right must broadly bear the same characteristics. Fortuitous
circumstances of theft holding the grade post carrying	 the
same designation or scale of pay or discharging the	same
duty would not justify the conclusion that they being to the
same cadre.

4. An officer appointed by promotion in accordance	with
Rules and within quota and on declaration of probation is
entitled to reckon his seniority from the date of promotion
and the entire length of service, though initially tempo-
rary, shall be counted for seniority. Ad hoc or fortuitous
appointments on a temporary or stop gap basis cannot be
taken into account for the purpose of seniority, even if the
appointee was subsequently qualified to hold the post on a
regular	 basis.	 To give benefit of such service would be
contrary to equality	enshrined in
Article 14
read	with

Article	 16(1)
of the Constitution as	 unequals would be
treated as equals. When promotion is out side the quota, the
seniority would be reckoned from the date of	the vacancy
within the quota, rendering the previous service fortuitous.
The previous promotion would be regular only from the	date
of the	 vacancy within the quota and	seniority shall be
counted from that date and not from the date of his earlier
promotion or subsequent confirmation. In order to do justice
to the promotees it would not be proper to do injustice to
the direct recruits. The rule of quota being a statutory one
must be strictly implemented and it is impermissible for the
authorities concerned to deviate from the rule due to admin-
istrative exigencies or expediency. The result	 of pushing
down the promotees appointed in excess of the quota any work
out hardship but it is unavoidable and any	construction
otherwise would be illegal, nullifying the force of statuto-
ry rules and would offend
Articles 14
and
16(1).

5.	Since the rules are legislative in character,	they
must harmoniously be interpreted as a connected whole giving
life and force to each word, phrase and rule and no	part
thereof should be rendered nugatory or a surplusage. Resort
to iron out the creases could be had only when the construc-
tion of the relevant rule, phrase or word Would lead to
unintended absurd results.

5.1	 In an	 appropriate case if the court	 finds	that
wanton	or deliberate deviation from the rules was made by
the implementing authority the court should call upon	them
to explain the reasons therefore and in the	 absence of
proper	explanation forthcoming castigate the authority	 and
pass structures condemning	the actions which would
discipline
the authorities to adhere to the rules. Undue latitude	 and
acquiesce thereto would not only defeat the due	 enforcement
of the rules but also create disorder and frustration among
the members of the service.

Rule 27 of the U.P. Forest Service Rules, 1952 gives
power to the Governor that if he is satisfied that	 the
operation of any rule regarding conditions of service of the
members	 caused undue hardship in a particular case; he	 may
consult	 the Public Service Commission; notwithstanding
anything contained in the Rules and dispense with or relax
the requirement the conditions of service and	 extend	 the
necessary benefit as is expedient so as to relieve hardship
and to	 cause just and equitable results. The	 word "may"
consult	 the Commission has been used in the	 context of
discharge of statutory duty. The Governor is obligated to
consult	 the Public Service Commission. Therefore, the	word
"may" must be construed as to mean "shall" and it is manda-
tory on the part of the Governor to	consult	 the Public
Service	 Commission before exempting or relaxing the opera-
tion of rule regarding conditions of the service of a member
to relieve him from undue hardship and to cause just	 and
equitable results.

5.3	 There is a distinction between "rules	of recruit-
ment" and "conditions of service". The rules	relating to
recruitment to the service either under rule 5(a) or 5(b) or
the manner of recruitment to service as per Appendix 'A' or
'B' are basic rules of recruitment to service. They are	 not
subject to rule 27.

Narendra Chadha v. Union of India & Ors., [1986] 1
S.C.R. 211; referred to.