Central Administrative Tribunal - Ernakulam

M.A. Varghese vs Union Of India Represented By on 9 October, 2012

CENTRAL ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ERNAKULAM BENCH

Original Application No. 351 of 2012

Tuesday, this the 09th day of October, 2012

CORAM:

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.R. RAMAN, JUDICIAL MEMBER
HON'BLE MR. K. GEORGE JOSEPH, ADMINISTRATIVE MEMBER

M.A. Varghese,
S/o. M.V. Alias,
Chief Travelling Ticket Inspector (CTTI),
Grade-1, Southern Railway,
Trivandrum Division, Trivandrum,
Residing at Marattu House,
Alathuchira P.O., Trivandrum District ... Applicant.

(By Advocate Mr. T.C. Govindaswamy)

v e r s u s

1. Union of India represented by
The Secretary to the Government of India,
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board),
Rail Bhavan, New Delhi - 110 001.

2. The General Manager,
Southern Railway, Headquarters Office,
Park Town P.O., Chennai - 600 003

3. The Chief Personnel Officer,
Southern Railway, Headquarters Office,
Park Town P.O., Chennai - 600 003

4. The Divisional Personnel Officer,
Southern Railway, Trivandrum Division,
Thiruvananthapuram - 695 014 ... Respondents.

(By Advocate Mr. Sumathi Dandapani (Sr.) with Mr. V.V. Joshy)

This application having been heard on 20.09.12, the Tribunal on 09.10.12

delivered the following :

O R D E R

HON'BLE MR. K GEORGE JOSEPH, ADMINISTRATIVE MEMBER

The applicant is a Chief Travelling Ticket Inspector (CTTI) in PB-2 with

Grade Pay of Rs. 4600/- at the Trivandrum Railway Station of the Southern

Railway. He commenced service as Ticket Collector on 18.08.1972. For

Group-B selection (70% quota), Group-C employees working in PB-2 with GP

of Rs. 4200/- and above with 3 years non-fortuitous service in the grade are

eligible. An integrated seniority list of all eligible candidates belonging to the

different seniority units forming the feeder cadre is to be published division

wise for promotion to Group-B service of Commercial Department of Southern

Railway. Annexure A-2 notification dated 15.12.2010 with an integrated list of

eligible staff coming within the zone of consideration and a standby list for

selection through a written test and viva voce test was for filling up of 06

vacancies (UR-05, SC-01 and ST-Nil) of Assistant Commercial Manager

(ACM) against 70% quota in the Commercial Department. The applicant had

challenged the same before this Tribunal in O.A. No. 51/2011 which became

infructuous as none of the 24 candidates could obtain the qualifying marks in

the written examination. 60 employees, all SC/ST employees, except 05

belonging to the general category, were alerted for promotion to 08 vacancies

(UR-06, SC-01, ST-01) in the cadre of ACM (Group-B) vide notification dated

25.01.2012 at Annexure A-1. Challenging the Annexure A-1 notification , the

applicant has filed this O.A. for the following reliefs:

(i) Call for the records leading to the issue of Annexure A1
notification No. P(G)532/11/ACM/70%(Regular) dated
25.01.2012 and quash the same;

(ii)Declare that Annexure A-14 Railway Board Order bearing RBE
No. 33/02 dated 08.03.2002 is arbitrary, discriminatory and
unconstitutional and quash the same;

(iii)Direct the respondents - Railway Administration to prepare and
circulate an integrated seniority list of all the eligible employees
of the Commercial Department, as done in Annexures A6 and A7
and that too after complying with the principles in Annexure A-10
at every step and circulate it among the employees for objections
if any, and finalise the seniority list before conducting selection
for promotion to the post of Assistant Commercial Manager in
Group-B Service in the Commercial Department;

(iv)Direct the respondents to consider the applicant also for
promotion to the post of Assistant Commercial Manager against
the vacancies notified in Annexure A1 and direct further to grant
the consequential benefits thereof;

(v)Award costs of and incidental to this application;

(vi)Pass such other orders or directions as deemed just, fit and
necessary in the facts and circumstances of the case.

2. The applicant submitted that when different streams of employees from

different categories and units merge together for selection for promotion, an

integrated seniority list of all the categories of staff eligible to compete would

inevitably be prepared first. From that seniority list only, the zone of

consideration could be determined. In the absence of an integrated seniority

list of all the eligible staff of the different categories of employees, viz.

Commercial Clerks, Ticket Checking Staff, ECRC, Office Clerk of the

Commercial Department finalised after calling for objections, the purported

action of the respondents for selection to the post of ACM as per Annexure

A-1 notification is illegal and unsustainable. The list of employees enclosed in

Annexure A-1 is not an integrated seniority list, but only a list of persons from

the seniority lists which were erroneously prepared against various

judgements of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Union of India vs. Virpal Singh

Chauhan and Ors.
(
1995 (6) SCC 684), Ajit Singh Januja and Ors. vs. State of

Punjab and Others
(1996 (2) SCC 715), Ajit Singh and Others (II) vs. State of

Punjab and Others (1999 (7) SCC 209), Ramprasad and Others vs. D.K. Vijay

and Ors. (1999 (
7) SCC 251 and Suraj Bhan Meena and Another vs. State of

Rajasthan and Others
(2011 (1) SCC (L&S) 01) and the order of this Tribunal

in O.A.No. 18/2001 (K.M. Geevarghese and Another vs. Union of India and

Others). Not a single person from the general category is included in the main

list.
Article 16 (4A)
of the Constitution is only a provision enabling the State

to make any provision for reservation in the matter of promotion with or without

consequential seniority to any class or vacancies in services under the State.

No reservation can be made for SC/ST in the matter of promotion without

collecting the quantifiable data showing the backwardness and inadequacy of

representation in the Railway service. Further, compliance with the provision

of
Article 335
which stipulates the requirement of maintaining efficiency in

administration is to be made. The Railway has not so far done this exercise.

Annexure A-1 notification and Annexure A-14 Railway Board order are issued

without the aforesaid pre-condition as laid down under
Article 16(4A)
and
(4B)
of the Constitution of India in view of the decisions in
M. Nagraj and

Others vs. Union of India and Others
, (2006) 8 SCC 212, and in
Suraj Bhan

Meena and Another vs. State of Rajasthan and Others
(supra) and in the order

dated 02.12.2010 in O.A. No. 2211/2008,
All India Equality Form and Others

vs. Union of India and Others
, of the Principal Bench of the CAT. Those who

are included in Annexure A-1 are the persons who were already included in

Annexure A-2 and found unqualified as evident by Annexure A-4. They have

no right to be considered again in the very same vacancies on the very same

year. The failure on the part of the respondents to prepare and finalise the

seniority/eligibility list according to the principles contained in para 319(A) of

Annexure A-10 Railway Board order read with Annexure A-11 before initiating

the process of selection is arbitrary and discriminatory. Even if seniority is

given to the SC/ST candidates, it cannot be considered for promotion against

the general category vacancies. Shri R. Hariharan who is included in the

standby list was appointed in the entry grade 4 years later than the applicant.

3. The respondents in their reply statement submitted that there is no

connection between the cadre seniority maintained in the division and the inter

se seniority. The integrated seniority is not a regular seniority. It is made for

the purpose of selection from the available and eligible employees in the

relevant cadres of Commercial Department. The lists of eligible employees

are maintained at all divisions. An inter se seniority list pertaining to the

division is forwarded for further amalgamation at the Headquarter to arrive at

the required integrated seniority list comprising of the cadres of all divisions to

determine the zone of consideration for selection as per para 203.4 of IREM

Vol.1. The Railway Board order bearing No. RBE 33/2002 dated 08.03.2002

is a policy matter. The policy decision is based on the constitutional

amendment to negate the effect of para 319(A) of the IREM and to grant

consequential seniority to the SC/ST employees on their promotion by virtue

of rule of reservation. Seniority based on the date of entry into the relevant

grade is the criterion for determining the zone of consideration. The date of

entry of the applicant into the grade of RS. 6500-10000 (pre-revised) is

01.03.1993 whereas that of Shri R. Hariharan is 07.09.1990. Preparing an

integrated seniority list of all the eligible candidates belonging to the different

seniority units forming the feeder cadre for promotion is not necessary and

relevant to the issue in question as the applicant is not senior enough to be

called for selection in terms of para 203.4 and 203.5 of the IREM. The names

listed in the main and standby lists are the integrated seniority list as that of

Annexures A-6 and A-7 to the extent required. The applicant has never

challenged the original seniority list of Ticket checking cadre all these years

nor against the promotion of Shri R. Hariharan ahead of him at any point of

time. All Railway employees irrespective of their community, on their

promotion from one grade to another will have consequential seniority from

the date of entry into the promoted grade.
The Railway Board based on the

85th Constitutional Amendment Act, 2001, vide letter dated 08.03.2002 had

restored the old seniority rules. There is no excess representation of reserved

candidates in the cadre of Ticket Checking Staff prior to 10.02.1995 also as

per the report submitted by a High Level Committee. Those SC/ST employees

promoted on their own merit and seniority against unreserved points and not

owing to reservation shall not be treated as roster point promotees. The

judgement of Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Suraj Bhan Meena
's case is not

applicable to the present case as it pertains to the service rules of Rajasthan

Government and not the Central Government policies. The order dated

02.12.2010 in O.A. No. 2211/2008 is challenged before the Hon'ble High Court

of Delhi in W.P.(C) Nos. 1974/2011 and 2280/2011 and the same is pending

for adjudication. As the Hon'ble Supreme Court has declared the validity of

77th and 85th amendments to the Constitution of India, the Railway Board

circular dated 08.03.2002 was issued reverting the provisions after issuance of

the circular dated 28.021997.

The applicant had neither agitated against the

judgement of Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Nagraj
's case nor the 77th and 85th

amendments nor impleaded affected parties. The conditions stipulated in the

case of Ajit Singh-II have already been complied with and no excess promotion

has been made since 1984 over and above the prescribed percentage.

Therefore, there is no necessity to revise the seniority as per Railway Board

letter dated 28.02.1997. As long as the Constitution which governs the

assignment of seniority has not been challenged, the seniority which was

assigned on implementation of such constitutional amendments cannot be

questioned.

4. In the rejoinder statement filed by the applicant, it was submitted that the

contention of the respondents that the seniority of all the eligible employees

are not required to be published as has been done in all other departments, is

not substantiated by indicating any rule or order. The question whether the

applicant is senior or not can be considered only if the respondents publish

the integrated seniority of all the eligible candidates. Without publishing the

same, the respondents cannot say that the applicant is not senior enough to

be considered for promotion. The very list at Annexure A-1 would show that

there has been an exorbitantly excess representation of the members of the

SC and ST. The order dated 08.03.2002, being the policy of the Railway

Board, is under challenge. Therefore, the necessity to implead any private

person does not arise.

5. In the reply to the rejoinder, the respondents submitted that the applicant

being junior to those alerted in the final stage, the integrated list of entire lot

running to more than 500 employees is not required for the present selection

as there are only 08 posts to be filled up. The present list as per Annexure R-

1 dated 10.07.2012 includes 3 URs besides SC/ST employees as also 15 new

employees. They are not the same group of persons except (9), who are

seniors as can be seen from Annexure R-4 selection notification dated

10.02.2011. In terms of the instructions contained in Annexure R-3 RBE No.

46/2010, the inter se seniority to meet the requirement for selection on hand

has been prepared. The Annexures A-6 and A-7 issued for Engineering and

Mechanical departments' Group-B selection were huge for the reason that

there were a large number of vacancies. They were not prepared as per the

instructions contained in Annexure A-10, which is no more available as it has

been withdrawn. According to
Article 141
of the Constitution of India, the

status of the judgement of the Hon'ble Supreme Court is "declared law" of the

land. The 85th amendment was upheld by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in

Nagraj
's case. It, being the declared law, is binding on all the lower Courts in

the Country.

Without challenging the implementation of the 85th amendment or

challenging the judgement in
Nagraj
's case, the applicant has no right to

challenge the seniority assignment as per the existing rules and provisions

confirmed by the 85th amendment and approved by the Hon'ble Supreme Court

in Nagaraj's case. As per RBE No. 33/2002 dated 08.03.2002, if any

unreserved employee is promoted based on the instructions of 319(A)

between 10.02.1995 and 17.06.1995, his promotion is personal, but seniority

cannot be given. Whereas, the promotions given to the unreserved category

of employees against the reserved points either before 10.02.1995 or after

17.06.1995 are protected.
Therefore, the seniority issues were settled in

Nagaraj's case. There is no provision to delete the employees who have failed

in the earlier selections. Even if they are excluded, the applicant will not figure

in the field of eligibility for the present selection as the last person alerted for

the written examination entered into the Grade Pay of Rs. 4600/- on

01.05.1992.
The prayer of the applicant is to prepare the seniority list based

on the catch up rule explained in
Virpal Singh Chauhan
's case.

The 85th

amendment reverses the decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the cases

of Virpal Singh Chauhan, Ajit Singh-I and Ajit Singh-II. There is no catch up

rule in determining seniority followed in the India Railways after the 85th

amendment as confirmed by Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Nagraj
's case.

6. We have heard Mr. T.C. Govindaswamy (Sr.), learned counsel for the

applicant and Mrs. Sumathi Dandapani (Sr.) with Mr. V.V. Joshi, learned

counsel for the respondents and perused the records.

7. The issues involved in this O.A are (i) preparation of integrated

seniority list for the purpose of promotion of Group-C employees to the post of

ACM (Group-B) and (ii) the tenability of accelerated seniority to the SC/ST

employees promoted on roster point. In regard to the first issue, for the sake

of convenience, paras 203 (1) to (6) of IREM Vol.1 are extracted as under:

"203.1. Conditions of eligibility.- For the selection, all Group 'C'
employees working on a regular basis in grade the minimum of
which is Rs. 5000/- in the revised scale and in the higher Group 'C'
grades and who have rendered not less than 3 years of non-
fortuitous service in the grade are eligible. There will be no distinction
between permanent and temporary employees.

( Railway Board's letter No. E(GP)/2005/2/69 dated 5.1.06]

203.2. In case a junior employee is considered for selection by
virtue of his satisfying the relevant minimum service conditions all
persons senior to him shall be held to be eligible, notwithstanding the
position that they do not fulfill the requisite minimum service
conditions.

203.4. Zone of consideration.- The number of employees to be
called for the selection will be in accordance with the sliding scale in
the order of seniority as shown below -

1. vacancies - 5 employees.

2. vacancies - 8 employees.

3. vacancies - 10 employees.

4. vacancies and above employees equal to three times the
number of vacancies.

203.5. Since employees from the different streams will be eligible to
appear for the selection, their integrated seniority for purposes of the
selection should be determined on the basis of total length of non-
fortuitous service rendered in grade Rs. 6500-10500 (R.S.) and
above. In other words the date of appointment to the grade Rs.
6500-10500 (R.S.) on a non fortuitous basis will be the criterion.

203.6. If adequate number of SCs/STs are not available within the
field so determined for consideration against reserved vacancies the
field should be extended to five times the number of vacancies and
only those SCs/STs coming in the extended field (and not the others)
should be considered. "

Further, para 2(i) of RBE No. 46/10 dated 29.03.2010 at Annexure R-3

reads as under:

"2. Now, consequent upon implementation of the pay scales
recommended by the VI Pay Commission, the matter regarding
eligibility conditions for appearing in the Selection/LDCE for
promotion to Group 'B' posts in the major departments having
'Organised Services' (except Accounts Department), has been
considered by the Board and it has been decided that :

(i) For Group 'B' selections (70% quota), Group 'C' employees
working in Pay Band PB-2 (Rs.9300-34,800) with Grade Pay of
Rs.4200 and above with 3 years of non-fortuitous service in the
grade (including non-fortuitous service rendered in the
corresponding pre-revised grades) will be eligible."

8. From the above, it is clear that an integrated seniority list based on the

total length of non-fortuitous service rendered in GP Rs. 4600/- or Rs. 4200/-,

as the case may be, is to be prepared. The inter se seniority list of eligible

employees at the divisional level is forwarded for further amalgamation at the

Headquarters to get the required integrated seniority list comprising of the

cadres of all the divisions from which the zone of consideration is drawn up, as

per the say of the respondents. It appears that the seniority list of all the

eligible employees of the Civil and Mechanical departments have been

published which are produced at Annexures A-6 and A-7. If Annexures A-6

and A-7 are long , just because there are a good number of vacancies to be

filled up, then it is not substantiated by the respondents by stating the number

of vacancies and the number of eligible employees considered for promotion.

The contention of the respondents is that an integrated seniority list of entire

lot running to more than 500 employees is not required for the present

selection as there are only 08 posts to be filled up. According to them, the

inter se seniority list to meet the requirement of selection on hand in terms of

the instructions contained in Annexure R-3 and para 203.5 of IREM Vol.1.

has been prepared. Those instructions speak of integrated seniority list and

the criterion for determining the inter se seniority. There is nothing in them to

support the stand of the respondents that the integrated seniority list should be

limited to meet the requirement of selection on hand. A truncated integrated

seniority list which appears just in time for producing the main list and reserve

list and disappears soon after does not lend itself to be scrutinized and

challenged by those eligible employees who are not included in it. Therefore,

we are inclined to agree in the interest of transparency and equity with the

contention of the applicant that an integrated seniority list of all categories of

staff eligible to compete should be prepared first and then the zone of

consideration should be drawn up from it. If an integrated seniority list is long,

it is only because there are a large number of eligible employees . Length of

the list is not a justification to curtail it arbitrarily. Once made, it would require

only periodic revision. In the absence of specific rule to limit the size, as in the

case of zone of consideration, the respondents are bound to prepare an

integrated seniority list of all eligible employees for the purpose of promotion to

Group-B . The assessment of seniority as per para 320 and 203.5 of IREM

Vol.1 provision does not come in the way of preparing an integrated seniority

list as above. When the Civil and Mechanical departments have published

integrated seniority lists running into 500 or 700 employees, there is no reason

why the Commercial department could not have prepared an integrity seniority

list of all eligible employees. The respondents have not indicated any rule or

order which treated the Commercial department of Souther Railway differently

from other departments in the matter of preparing integrated seniority list for

the purpose of promotion to Group-B.

9. The integrated seniority list at the Headquarter level is directly related to

the seniority list maintained at the divisional level. If the seniority list in the

different units at the different levels are not prepared correctly, the integrated

seniority at the divisional level cannot be correct. Herein, the question of

accelerated promotion to the SC/ST employees, who are promoted as per the

roster point arises for consideration. The applicant contended that Annexure

A-1 is not an integrated seniority list but only a list of persons from the

seniority lists which were erroneously prepared against a catena of

judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court. The catch up rule explained in Virpal

Singh Chauhan's judgement is relied on by the applicant. The respondents

averred that the catch up rule is not followed in Indian Railways after 85th

amendment of the Constitution of India, which was confirmed by the Hon'ble

Supreme Court in
Nagraj
's case.

The Apex Court held in
M. Nagraj
's case

(supra) while upholding the constitutional validity by 77th and 85th amendments

that in case, rules in respect of reservation in promotion with consequential

seniority are to be framed, such rules should satisfy the tests of quantifiable

data as to backwardness and inadequacy of representation in public

employment and the overall administrative efficiency. Unless such an

exercise is undertaken, the rules relating to reservation in promotion with

consequential seniority cannot be implemented.
Articles 16(4A)
and
16(4B)

are enabling provisions calling for satisfaction of the conditions precedent for

implementation.

This position has been confirmed by the Hon'ble Supreme

Court in the judgement dated 27.04.2012 in Civil Appeal No. 2608/2011 (
U.P.

Power Corporation Ltd. vs. Rajesh Kumar & Ors.
). The relevant part of the

said judgement is extracted as under :

"36. To appreciate the rival submissions raised at the bar and the
core controversy, it is absolutely seemly to understand what has
been held in
M. Nagraj
(supra) by the Constitution Bench. While
assailing the validity of
Article 16(4A)
of the Constitution which
provides for reservation in promotion with a consequential
seniority, it was contended that equity in the context of
Article 16
(1)
connotes accelerated promotion so as not to include
consequential seniority and as consequential seniority has been
attached to the accelerated promotion, the constitutional
amendment is violative of
Article 14
read with
Article 16(1)
of the
Constitution. Various examples were cited about the disastrous
affects that would be ushered in, in view of the amendment. After
noting all the contentions, the Constitution Bench addressed to the
concept of reservation in the context of
Article 16(4)
and further
proceeded to deal with equity, justice and merit. In that context,
the Bench stated thus: -

"This problem has to be examined, therefore, on the facts of
each case. Therefore,
Article 16(4)
has to be construed in the
light of
Article 335
of the Constitution. Inadequacy in
representation and backwardness of Scheduled Caste and
Scheduled Tribes are circumstances which enable the State
Government to act under
Article 16 (4)
of the Constitution.
However, as held by this Court the limitations on the discretion
of the Government in the matter of reservation under Article16
(4) as well as
Article 16 (4A)
come in the form of
Article 335
of
the Constitution."

While dealing with reservation and affirmative action, the
Constitution Bench opined thus: -

"48. It is the equality "in fact" which has to be decided looking
at the ground reality. Balancing comes in where the question
concerns the extent of reservation. If the extent of reservation
goes beyond cut-off point then it results in reverse
discrimination. Anti-discrimination legislation has a tendency of
pushing towards de facto reservation. Therefore, a numerical
benchmark is the surest immunity against charges of
discrimination.

49. Reservation is necessary for transcending caste and not
for perpetuating it. Reservation has to be used in a limited
sense otherwise it will perpetuate casteism in the country.
Reservation is under-written by a special justification. Equality
in
Article 16(1)
is individual-specific whereas reservation in

Article&#160;16(4)
&#160;
and
Article 16 (4-A)
is enabling. The
discretion of the State is, however, subject to the existence of
"backwardness" and "inadequacy of representation" in public
employment. Backwardness has to be based on objective
factors whereas inadequacy has to factually exist. This is
where judicial review comes in. However, whether reservation
in a given case is desirable or not, as a policy, is not for us to
decide as long as the parameters mentioned in
Articles 16 (4)

and
16 (4A)
are maintained. As stated above, equity, justice
and merit (
Article 335
)/efficiency are variables which can only
be identified and measured by the State. Therefore, in each
case, a contextual case has to be made out depending upon
different circumstances which may exist Statewise."

37. The Bench referred to the cases of Indra Sawhney (supra),
R.K. Sabharwal (supra),
Vir Pal Singh Chauhan
(supra),
Ajit Singh
(I
) (supra) and Ajit Singh (II) (supra) and opined that the concept of
catch-up rule and consequential seniority are judicially evolved
concepts to control the extent in reservation and the creation of
this concept is relatable to service jurisprudence. Thereafter, the
Constitution Bench referred to the scope of the impugned
amendment and the Objects and Reasons and, in paragraph 86,
observed thus: -

"Clause (4-A) follows the pattern specified in Clauses (3) and
(4) of
Article 16.
Clause (4-A) of
Article 16
emphasizes the
opinion of the States in the matter of adequacy of
representation. It gives freedom to the State in an appropriate
case depending upon the ground reality to provide for
reservation in matters of promotion to any class or classes of
posts in the services. The State has to form its opinion on the
quantifiable data regarding adequacy of representation.

Clause (4-A) of
Article 16
is an enabling provision. It gives
freedom to the State to provide for reservation in matters of
promotion. Clause (4-A) of
Article 16
applies only to SCs and
STs. The said clause is carved out of
Article 16(4).
Therefore,
Clause (4-A) will be governed by the two compelling reasons -

"backwardness" and "inadequacy of representation", as
mentioned in
Article 16(4).
If the said two reasons do not exist
then the enabling provision cannot come into force. The State
can make provision for reservation only if the above two
circumstances exist. Further in Ajit Singh (II), this Court has
held that apart from "backwardness" and "inadequacy of
representation" the State shall also keep in mind "overall
efficiency" (
Article 335
). Therefore, all the three factors have to
be kept in mind by the appropriate Government in providing for
reservation in promotion for SCs and STs."

Thereafter, the Bench referred to the 2000 Amendment Act, the
Objects and Reasons and the proviso inserted to
Article 335
of the
Constitution and held thus: -

"98.
By the Constitution (Eighty-Second Amendment) Act,
, a proviso was inserted at the end of
Article 335
of the
Constitution which reads as under:

Provided that nothing in this article shall prevent in making of
any provision in favour of the members of the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes for relaxation in qualifying
marks in any examination or lowering the standards of
evaluation, for reservation in matters of promotion to any
class or classes of services or posts in connection with the
affairs of the Union or of a State."

99. This proviso was added following the benefit of reservation in
promotion conferred upon SCs and STs alone. This proviso was
inserted keeping in mind the judgment of this Court in Vinod
Kumar which took the view that relaxation in matters of reservation
in promotion was not permissible under
Article 16(4)
in view of the
command contained in
Article 335.
Once a separate category is
carved out of Clause (4) of
Article 16
then that category is being

given relaxation in matters of reservation in promotion. The proviso
is confined to SCs and STs alone. The said proviso is compatible
with the scheme of
Article 16(4-A)."

In paragraph 102, their Lordships have ruled thus: -

"Clause (4) of
Article 16
, however, states that the
appropriate Government is free to provide for reservation in
cases where it is satisfied on the basis of quantifiable data
that backward class is inadequately represented in the
services. Therefore, in every case where the State decides
to provide for reservation there must exist two
circumstances, namely, "backwardness" and "inadequacy of
representation'. As stated above, equity, justice and
efficiency are variable factors. These factors are context-
specific. There is no fixed yardstick to identify and measure
these three factors, it will depend on the facts and
circumstances of each case. These are the limitations on the
mode of the exercise of power by the State. None of these
limitations have been removed by the impugned
amendments. If the concerned State fails to identify and
measure backwardness, inadequacy and overall
administrative efficiency then in that event the provision for
reservation would be invalid. These amendments do not
alter the structure of
Articles 14
, 15
and
16 (equity code).

The parameters mentioned in
Article 16(4)
are retained.
Clause (4-A) is derived from Clause (4) of
Article 16.
Clause
(4-A) is confined to SCs and STs alone. Therefore, the
present case does not change the identity of the
Constitution."

After so stating, it was observed that there is no violation of the
basic structure of the Constitution and the provisions are enabling
provisions. At that juncture, it has been observed as follows: -

"
Article 16(4) ;
is enacted as a remedy for the past historical
discriminations against a social class. The object in enacting
the enabling provisions like
Articles 16(4)
, 16 (4a)
and
(4B)
is that the State is empowered to identify and recognize
the compelling interests. If the State has quantifiable data to
show backwardness and inadequacy then the State can
make reservations in promotions keeping in mind
maintenance of efficiency which is held to be a constitutional
limitation on the discretion of the State in making reservation
as indicated by
Article 335.
As stated above, the concepts of
efficiency, backwardness, inadequacy of representation are
required to be identified and measured. That exercise
depends on availability of data. That exercise depends on
numerous factors. It is for this reason that enabling
provisions are required to be made because each competing
claim seeks to achieve certain goals. How best one should
optimize these conflicting claims can only be done by the
administration in the context of local prevailing conditions in
public employment. This is amply demonstrated by the
various decisions of this Court discussed hereinabove.

Therefore, there is a basic difference between "equality in
law" and "equality in fact" (See Affirmative Action by William
Darity). If
Articles 16(4-A)
and
16(4B)
flow from
Article 16(4) ;

and if
Article 16(4)
is an enabling provision then
Articles 16
(4A)
and
16(4B)
are also enabling provisions. As long as the
boundaries mentioned in
Article 16(4)
, namely,
backwardness, inadequacy and efficiency of administration
are retained in
Articles 16(4A)
and
16(4B)
as controlling
factors, we cannot attribute constitutional invalidity to these
enabling provisions. However, when the State fails to identify
and implement the controlling factors then excessiveness
comes in, which is to be decided on the facts of each case.
In a given case, where excessiveness results in reverse
discrimination, this Court has to examine individual cases
and decide the matter in accordance with law. This is the
theory of "guided power". We may once again repeat that
equality is not violated by mere conferment of power but it is
breached by arbitrary exercise of the power conferred."

In paragraph 108, the Bench analyzed the concept of application
of the doctrine of guided power under
Article 335
of the
Constitution and, in that context, opined thus: -

"Therefore, the question before us is - whether the State
could be empowered to relax qualifying marks or standards
for reservation in matters of promotion. In our view, even
after insertion of this proviso, the limitation of overall
efficiency in
Article 335
Is not obliterated. Reason is thaT
"efficiency" is a variable factor. It is for State concerned to
decide in a given case, whether the overall efficiency of the
system is affected by such relaxation. If the relaxation is so
excessive that it ceases to be qualifying marks then certainly
in a given case, as in the past, the State is free not to relax
such standards. In other cases, the State may evolve a
mechanism under which efficiency, equity and justice, all
three variables, could be accommodated. Moreover,
Article
is to be read with
Article 46
which provides that the
State shall promote with special care the educational and
economic interests of the weaker sections of the people and,
in particular, of the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes,
and shall protect them from social injustice. Therefore, where
the State finds compelling interests of backwardness and
inadequacy, it may relax the qualifying marks for SCs/STs.
These compelling interests however have to be identified by
weighty and comparable data."

Thereafter, the Constitution Bench proceeded to deal with the test
to judge the validity of the impugned State Acts and opined as
follows: -

"110. As stated above, the boundaries of the width of the
power, namely, the ceiling-limit of 50% (the numerical
benchmark), the principle of creamy layer, the compelling
reasons, namely, backwardness, inadequacy of
representation and the overall administrative efficiency are
not obliterated by the impugned amendments. At the
appropriate time, we have to consider the law as enacted by
various States providing for reservation if challenged. At that
time we have to see whether limitations on the exercise of
power are violated. The State is free to exercise its discretion
of providing for reservation subject to limitation, namely, that

there must exist compelling reasons of backwardness,
inadequacy of representation in a class of post(s) keeping in
mind the overall administrative efficiency. It is made clear
that even if the State has reasons to make reservation, as
stated above, if the impugned law violates any of the above
substantive limits on the width of the power the same would
be liable to be set aside."

In paragraph 117, the Bench laid down as follows: -

"The extent of reservation has to be decided on facts of each
case. The judgment in Indra Sawhney does not deal with
constitutional amendments. In our present judgment, we are
upholding the validity of the constitutional amendments
subject to the limitations. Therefore, in each case the Court
has got to be satisfied that the State has exercised its
opinion in making reservations in promotions for SCs and
STs and for which the State concerned will have to place
before the Court the requisite quantifiable data in each case
and satisfy the Court that such reservations became
necessary on account of inadequacy of representation of
SCs/ STs in a particular class or classes of posts without
affecting general efficiency of service as mandated under
Article 335of the Constitution."

In the conclusion portions, in paragraphs 123 and 124, it has been
ruled thus: -

"123. However, in this case, as stated above, the main issue
concerns the "extent of reservation". In this regard the State
concerned will have to show in each case the existence of
the compelling reasons, namely, backwardness, inadequacy
of representation and overall administrative efficiency before
making provision for reservation. As stated above, the
impugned provision is an enabling provision. The State is not
bound to make reservation for SCs/STs in matter of
promotions. However, if they wish to exercise their discretion
and make such provision, the State has to collect quantifiable
data showing backwardness of the class and inadequacy of
representation of that class in public employment in addition
to compliance with
Article 335.
It is made clear that even if
the State has compelling reasons, as stated above, the State
will have to see that its reservation provision does not lead to
excessiveness so as to breach the ceiling-limit of 50% or
obliterate the creamy layer or extend the reservation
indefinitely.

124. Subject to the above, we uphold the constitutional
validity of the
Constitution (Seventy-Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1995
; the
Constitution (Eighty-First Amendment) Act,
; the
Constitution (Eighty-Second Amendment) Act,
and the
Constitution (Eighty-Fifth Amendment) Act,
."

38. From the aforesaid decision and the paragraphs we have
quoted hereinabove, the following principles can be carved out: -

i) Vesting of the power by an enabling provision may be
constitutionally valid and yet `exercise of power' by the State
in a given case may be arbitrary, particularly, if the State fails

to identify and measure backwardness and inadequacy
keeping in mind the efficiency of service as required under

Article 335.

ii)
Article 16(4)
which protects the interests of certain
sections of the society has to be balanced against
Article 16
(1)
which protects the interests of every citizen of the entire
society. They should be harmonized because they are
restatements of the principle of equality under
Article 14.

iii) Each post gets marked for the particular category of
candidates to be appointed against it and any subsequent
vacancy has to be filled by that category candidate.

iv) The appropriate Government has to apply the cadre
strength as a unit in the operation of the roster in order to
ascertain whether a given class/group is adequately
represented in the service. The cadre strength as a unit also
ensures that the upper ceiling-limit of 50% is not violated.

Further roster has to be post-specific and not vacancy
based.

v) The State has to form its opinion on the quantifiable data
regarding adequacy of representation. Clause (4A) of
Article
is an enabling provision. It gives freedom to the State to
provide for reservation in matters of promotion. Clause (4A)
of
Article 16
applies only to SCs and STs. The said clause is
carved out of
Article 16(4A).
Therefore, Clause (4A) will be
governed by the two compelling reasons - "backwardness"
and "inadequacy of representation", as mentioned in
Article
16(4).
If the said two reasons do not exist, then the enabling
provision cannot be enforced.

vi) If the ceiling-limit on the carry-over of unfilled vacancies is
removed, the other alternative time-factor comes in and in
that event, the time-scale has to be imposed in the interest
of efficiency in administration as mandated by
Article 335.
If
the time-scale is not kept, then posts will continue to remain
vacant for years which would be detrimental to the
administration. Therefore, in each case, the appropriate
Government will now have to introduce the duration
depending upon the fact-situation.

vii) If the appropriate Government enacts a law providing for
reservation without keeping in mind the parameters in
Article
16(4)
and
Article 335
, then this Court will certainly set aside
and strike down such legislation.

viii) The constitutional limitation under
Article 335
is relaxed
and not obliterated. As stated above, be it reservation or
evaluation, excessiveness in either would result in violation
of the constitutional mandate. This exercise, however, will
depend on the facts of each case.

ix) The concepts of efficiency, backwardness and
inadequacy of representation are required to be identified
and measured. That exercise depends on the availability of
data. That exercise depends on numerous factors. It is for
this reason that the enabling provisions are required to be
made because each competing claim seeks to achieve
certain goals. How best one should optimize these conflicting

claims can only be done by the administration in the context
of local prevailing conditions in public employment.

x)
Article 16(4)
, therefore, creates a field which enables a
State to provide for reservation provided there exists
backwardness of a class and inadequacy of representation
in employment. These are compelling reasons. They do not
exist in
Article 16(1).
It is only when these reasons are
satisfied that a State gets the power to provide for
reservation in the matter of employment.

(emphasis supplied)

10. Further, in the order dated 02.12.2010 in O.A. No. 2211/2008, the

Principal bench of this Tribunal held as under:

"37. We have applied our mind to the pleadings and the
contentions raised by the learned counsel representing the
applicants on the issues as mentioned above, but are of the view
that once, in brevity, it is the case of the applicants that when no
compliance of pre-conditions as spelled out in M. Nagaraj's case
has been done, reservation in promotion with accelerated seniority
shall have to be worked in the way and manner as per the law
settled earlier on the issue. If that be so, we need not have to
labour on the issues raised by the applicants, as surely, if the
position is already settled, the only relevant discussion and
adjudication in this case can be and should be confined to non-
observance of the pre-conditions for making accelerated
promotions as valid. We have already held above that the railways
have not worked out or even applied their mind to the pre-
conditions as mentioned above before giving effect to the
provisions of
Article 16(4A)
, and for that reason, circular dated
29.2.2008 vide which the seniority of SC/ST railway servants
promoted by virtue of rule of reservation/roster has to be regulated
in terms of instructions contained in Board's letter dated 8.3.2002
and 13.1.2005, has to be quashed.
There is a specific prayer to
quash instructions dated 8.3.2002 and 13.1.2005 as well, but there
would be no need to do so as the same have been discussed in
the case of railways itself in the matter of
Virpal Singh Chauhan

(supra), and commented upon. While setting aside instructions
dated 29.2.2008, our directions would be to not to give accelerated
seniority to Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe category
employees till such time pre-conditions on which alone
Article 16
(4A)
of the Constitution is to operate, are complied with. No
directions in this case can be given as regards seniority of the
applicants vis-a-vis those who were appointed with them and have
stolen a march over them because of reservation and have
obtained accelerated seniority. No such specific prayer has been
made either. However, it would be open for the parties to this lis or
any one else to seek determination of their proper seniority for
which legal proceedings shall have to be resorted to. It would be
difficult to order across the board that all those who have obtained
the benefit of reservation and have also been accorded

accelerated seniority be put below general category candidates
who may have been senior to the reserved category employees
and became below in seniority on the promoted posts because of
conferment of accelerated seniority to the reserved category
employees. Surely, for seeking seniority over and above
Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe employees, number of
things shall have to be gone into, as for instance, as to when was
the promotion made and seniority fixed, and whether the cause of
general category employees would be within limitation. There can
be number of issues that may arise. We have mentioned only one
by way of illustration.

38. Present Original Application is disposed of in the
manner fully indicated above. In view of the nature of the
controversy involved in the case, costs of the litigation are made
easy."

(emphasis supplied)

11. In view of the above settled position of law, R.B.E. No. 33/2002 dated

08.03.2002 at Annexure A-14 allowing the SC/ST employees to retain consequential

seniority upon their promotion by virtue of rule of reservation with effect from

17.06.1995 has no legs to stand on. The respondents have implemented the

enabling provisions of the Constitution without meeting the pre-conditions of

ascertaining backwardness, inadequacy and overall administrative efficiency for

doing so as per the declared law of the land. The Principal Bench of this Tribunal

has already set aside the circular dated 29.02.2008 which reads as under:-

"R.B.E.No.29/2008

Subject : Principles for determining the seniority of staff
belonging to SC/ST promoted earlier vis-a-vis,
General/OBC staff promoted later.

Reference : (i)Board's letter No.E(NG)I-97/SR6/3 (Vol.III),
dated 8.3.2002 (Bahri's 33/2002, p-50)

(ii) Board's letter No.E(NG)I-97/SR6/3 (Vol.IV),
dated 13.1.2005, (Bahri's 7/2005, p-10).

[No.E(NG)I-97/SR6/3 Vol.IV dated 29.2.2008]

The Railways are aware that in pursuance of the
Constitution (85th
Amendment) Act, 2001
, instructions were
issued vide this Ministry's letter dated 8.3.2002 quoted above
that w.e.f 17.6.1995 SC/ST Railway servants shall, on their
promotion by virtue of rule of reservation/roster, be entitled to

consequential seniority also. These instructions were,
however, reiterated vide this Ministry's letter of even number
dated 21.11.2002 for implementation subject to final outcome
of the Writ Petitions pending before the Hon'ble Supreme
Court.

The Railways would also be aware that while disposing
of the aforesaid Writ Petitions, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
their order dated 19.10.2006 in the case of
M.Nagraj & Ors.
Vs. UOI & Ors
have, inter alia, upheld the validity of the
Constitution (85th
Amendment) Act, 2001
. So far as other
issues discussed in Apex Court's judgment, relevant
clarifications have since been issued by DOP&T vide their
O.M.No.36036/2/2007-Estt. (Res.) dated 29.3.2007 and
circulated vide this Ministry's letter No.97-E (SCT)I/49/25,
dated 29.5.2007. Thus, in the light of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court's order dated 19.10.2006, the seniority of the SC/ST
Railway servants promoted by virtue of rule of
reservation/roster shall be regulated in terms of instructions
contained in Board's letter dated 8.3.2002 and 13.1.2005

referred to above
."

The direction to regulate the seniority of the SC/ST Railway servants promoted

by virtue of the rule of reservation in terms of the instructions contained in

Board's letters dated 08.03.2002 and 13.01.2005 is quashed by the Principal

Bench. Consequently and also in the light of the judgement of the Apex Court

in
U.P. Power Corporation Ltd. vs. Rajesh Kumar
(supra) , the instructions

in R.B.E. No. 33/2002 dated 08.03.2002 have become null and void and,

therefore,there is no need to quash it. Mere pendency of Writ Petitions (C)

before the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi against the order of the Principal

Bench of CAT in O.A. No. 2211/2008 does not affect the validity of the order or

the onus of the respondents to implement it. Whether the applicant will find a

place in the zone of consideration depends on his position in the integrated

seniority list. Not being prejudicial to any legal right or claim of any person,

the question of non-impleadment of necessary parties does not arise in the

instant case.

12. In the result, the respondents are directed to prepare an integrated

seniority list of all eligible employees for promotion to Group-B and publish it

calling for objections, if any, and finalise it before conducting selection for

promotion to the post of Assistant Commercial Manager in Group-B service in

the Commercial Department. Annexure A-1 notification dated 25.01.2012 is

quashed.

13. The O.A. is allowed as above with no order as to costs.

(Dated, the 09th October, 2012)

(K. GEORGE JOSEPH) (JUSTICE P.R. RAMAN)
ADMINISTRATIVE MEMBER JUDICIAL MEMBER

cvr.