Central Administrative Tribunal - Delhi

All India Equality Forum vs Union Of India Through on 2 December, 2010

CENTRAL ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
PRINCIPAL BENCH
NEW DELHI

Original Application No.2211/2008

This the 2nd day of December, 2010

HONBLE SHRI JUSTICE V. K. BALI, CHAIRMAN

HONBLE SHRI L. K. JOSHI, VICE-CHAIRMAN (A)
HONBLE SMT. MEERA CHHIBBER, MEMBER (J)

1.	All India Equality Forum
having its registered office at
C-51, Fateh Nagar, Jail Road,
Tilak Nagar, New Delhi-110018
through its President, Shri J. R. Agarwal
S/o Atma Ram Agarwal,
R/o II B-4, J.N.Vyas Colony,
Shiv Bari Road, Bikaner-334003.

2.	Jagmohan Singh S/O tirath Singh,
working as Office Superintendent,
General Branch, Northern Railway,
Headquarters Office, Baroda House,
New Delhi.

3.	Rajendra Kumar Bhatnagar S/O Durga Prasad,
working as Chief Office Superintendent,
Mech. Branch, DRMs Office,
North Western Railway,
Bikaner.							  Applicants

( By Shri Puneet Jain, Advocate )

Versus

1.	Union of India through
Secretary, Department of Personnel & Training,
North Block, New Delhi.

2.	Chairman, Railway Board,
Rail Bhawan, New Delhi.

3.	Director (Estt) (NG),
Railway Board,
Rail Bhawan, New Delhi.

4.	General Manager,
Northern Railway,
Headquarters Office,
Baroda House, New Delhi.

5.	General Manager,
North Western Railway,
Headquarters Office, Jaipur.

6.	Divisional Railway Manager,
North Western Railway, Bikaner.

7.	All India SC/ST Railway Employees Association,
171-B Basant Lane, Railway Colony,
New Delhi-110055.					  Respondents

( By Shri Parag P. Tripathi, ASG and with him Shri Kunal Bhati, Shri V. S. R. Krishna and Shri Shailendra Tiwar, Advocates )

O R D E R

Justice V. K. Bali, Chairman:

This country has witnessed marathon litigation on reservation for Scheduled Castes (SC), Scheduled Tribes (ST) and Other Backward Classes (OBC) categories in the matter of public employment.
Insofar as, litigation as regards reservation in the initial appointments may have received a quietus on the litigation front, one would have thought that reservation in promotion, in view of insertion of
Article 16(4A)
in the Constitution of India and the judgment of the Honble Supreme Court in
M. Nagaraj v Union of India
[(2006) 8 SCC 212] may have also received a quietus, but that is not so. The facts of the present case, as enumerated hereinafter, would illustrate what we have said above.

2.	Applicant no.1 is an association registered under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860
. This forum is stated to be fighting for redressal of the grievances having common cause and relief of all employees of the Indian railways. The association has filed this Original Application under
Section 19
of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 for redressal of grievances of all employees of the railways in each category and grade belonging to groups B, C and D. Applicant nos. 2 and 3 have joined the applicant no.1 association being aggrieved by one and the same cause of action, as the relief claimed is common, as also to avoid multiplicity of litigation and enormity of expenses. The challenge posed by the applicants in the present Application is to circulars dated 29.2.2008 (Annexure A-1), 8.3.2002 (Annexure A-2) and 13.1.2005 (Annexure A-3).
In consequences of setting aside the impugned circulars as mentioned above, the applicants seek a direction to be issued to the respondents to re-cast the seniority list of all railway employees in each category and grade in groups B, C and D on the Indian railways on the basis of original date of appointment and that no benefit of consequential seniority to earlier promoted SC/ST employees be allowed. The applicants seek a further direction to be issued to the respondents to review all promotions made in the past on the basis of revised seniority list to be prepared on the basis of original date of appointment with consequential benefits of fixation of pay and payment of arrears. We may straightway refer to circulars as mentioned above, as the controversy in issue will become clear from the reading of the same. We may, however, first make a mention of the circulars dated 8.3.2002 and 13.1.2005 which came into being before the decision recorded by the Honble Supreme Court in
M. Nagaraj
(supra). Circular dated 29.2.2008 has come into being after the decision in the case aforesaid. The first circular challenged dated 8.3.2002 deals with principles for determining the seniority of staff belonging to SC/ST promoted earlier vis-`-vis General/OBC staff promoted later. Reading of the circular aforesaid would reveal that in pursuance of the
Constitution (Eighty-fifth Amendment) Act, 2001
(hereinafter to be referred as the Act of 2001), amending
Article 16 (4A)
of the Constitution, right from the date of its inclusion in the Constitution, i.e., 17.6.1995, the Government through the Department of Personnel and Training (DOP&T), had decided to negate the effects of the DOP&Ts OM dated 30.1.1997 with a view to allow the SC/ST employees to retain the seniority in the case of promotion by virtue of rule of reservation. That being the position, it has further been observed in the impugned circular that the Ministry of Railways had also considered the matter and decided to negate the effects of para 319 A of the Indian Railway Establishment Manual (IREM) Volume-I, 1989.

The instructions contained in para 319 A of IREM Volume-I, it appears, came into being pursuant to the judgment of the Honle Supreme Court in
Union of India v Virpal Singh Chauhan [JT
1995 (7) SC 231], according to which, a general category employee, as and when promoted, would catch up in the matter of seniority with the junior, who was promoted earlier only because of reservation. The Ministry of Railways decided as follows:

a)	SC/ST Railway Servants shall on their promotion by virtue of rule of reservation/roster, be entitled to consequential seniority also; and

b)	The above decision shall be effective from 17th June 1995.

Inasmuch as, the provisions contained in [para 319 A of IREM, volume-I, as introduced vide ACS nos. 25 and 44 under Ministrys letters dated 28.2.1997 and 15.5.1998 respectively, were withdrawn, it was also observed that seniority of the railway servants determined in the light of para 319 A would be revised as if this para never existed. It was further observed that inasmuch as, the earlier instructions issued pursuant to the judgment in Virpal Singh Chauhans case (supra), as incorporated in para 319 A, were effective from 10.2.1995, and in the light of revised instructions being made effective from 17.6.1995, the question as to how the cases falling between 10.2.1995 and 16.6.1995 should be regulated, was under consideration in consultation with DOP&T, and, therefore, separate instructions in that regard would follow. The remaining part of the circular aforesaid may not be relevant for determination of the controversy in issue. The circular dated 13.1.2005 deals with the period between 10.2.1995 and 16.6.1995.
In that regard, it has been stated in the circular aforesaid that since the
Constitution (Eighty-fifth) Amendment Act, 2001
, has been made effective from 17.6.1995, promotions, if any, of railway servants which had taken place during the period from 10.2.1995 to 16.6.1995, as per the principles of regaining seniority by General/OBC staff in terms of procedure in force at that point of time in implementation of the judgments of the Honble Supreme Court in
R. K. Sabharwal v State of Punjab
[(1995) 2
SCC 745] and Virpal Singh Chauhan
(supra), vide Ministrys letters dated 28.2.1997 and 15.5.1998, may be protected as personal to them. Existing para 3 (iii) of circular dated 8.3.2002 was to be substituted as follows:

Seniority of Railway servants determined in the light of para 319A shall be revised as if this para did not exist on and after 17.6.95. However, seniority determined and promotion effected in between the period 10.2.95 and 16.6.95 (both days inclusive) in terms of para 319A in force during the period in question shall be protected as personal to the incumbents.

Circular dated 29.2.2008 deals with principles for determining seniority of staff belonging to SC/ST promoted earlier vis-`-vis General/OBC staff promoted later. It is mentioned in the circular aforesaid that in pursuance of the Act of 2001, instructions had been issued vide Ministrys letter dated 8.3.2002 that with effect from 17.6.1995 SC/ST railway servants would, on their promotion by virtue of rule of reservation/roster, be entitled to consequential seniority also. These instructions were reiterated vide letter dated 21.11.2002 for implementation subject to final outcome of the writ petitions pending before the Honble Supreme Court. It is then mentioned that the Honble Supreme Court in its order dated 19.10.2006 in the case of
M. Nagaraj
(supra), inter alia, upheld the validity of the Act of 2001, and insofar as, other issues discussed in the judgment of the Apex Court, relevant clarifications had since been issued by DOP&T vide OM dated 29.3.2007, circulated vide Ministry of Railways OM dated 29.5.2007. It is then stated that in the light of the decision of the Honble Supreme Court in M. Nagarajs case, seniority of the SC/ST railway servants promoted by virtue of rule of reservation/roster would be regulated in terms of instructions contained in Railway Boards letters dated 8.3.2002 and 13.1.2005
referred to above
.

3.	What appears from the circulars aforesaid is that the railways for the purpose of conferment of accelerated seniority had bifurcated the period prior to 10.2.1995, the period between 10.2.1995 and 17.6.1995 and the period after 17.6.1995. As per the case set up by the applicants, for the period prior to 10.2.1995, since the judgment of the Honble Supreme Court in the case of
Virpal Singh Chauhan
(supra) is prospective from the date of judgment in the case of
R. K. Sabharwal
(supra), the persons promoted earlier would continue to enjoy the benefits of accelerated seniority. In other words, a person would not be pushed down in the matter of seniority when his admitted senior in the feeder post may also be promoted to the higher post. For the period between 10.2.1995 and 17.6.1995, the railways had accepted the judgment of Virpal Singh Chauhan and it was decided that no accelerated seniority would be conferred to any person who has been promoted during the said period. It is, however, further stated that promotion to the reserved category candidates would be personal to them. It is the case of the railways that since no promotions had been made during the said period of any SC/ST employees, the general category employees had nothing to be concerned about. Insofar as, the period after 17.6.1995 is concerned, it has been stated by the railways that since the Act of 2001 has been made effective retrospectively from 17.6.1995, and since the Railway Board letter dated 8.3.2002 has also been made retrospectively effective from 17.6.1995, the reserved category candidates promoted after 17.6.1995 would be entitled to accelerated seniority as well.

4.	There would be no need to make mention of the detailed pleadings as made in the Original Application, as the most part of the Application deals with the legal position as envisaged by judicial precedents on the issue, which, in any case, would be referred to by us hereinafter. All that we may mention on facts is that the applicant no.2, Jagmohan Singh, was appointed as clerk in the Ministry of Railways on 16.6.1972, whereas, Vijay Laxmi, Veena Rani, Mohan Lal Meena, S. N. Raut and Pyare Lal joined much later, i.e., on 13.8.1976, 30.9.1974, 19.3.1980, 16.2.1976 and 20.2.1978 respectively. They all belong to SC/ST categories. They have been further promoted on the posts of senior clerk, head clerks, OS-II and OS-1 under the policy of reservation prior to 17.6.1995, and also prior to promotion of the applicant no.2. The said employees were allowed benefit of consequential seniority from the date of earlier promotion on reserved posts. Applicant no.3, Rajendra Kumar Bhatnagar, joined the railways as clerk on 1.6.1974, whereas Ratan Lal, Rati Ram and Suraj Mal Meena, who belong to SC/ST categories, joined service on 18.5.1975, 16.11.1975 and 8.4.1982.
They have been further promoted as senior clerk, head clerk, OS-II, OS-I and COS prior to the promotion of the 3rd applicant and also prior to 17.6.1995. They have been allowed consequential seniority from the date of promotion on reserved posts and given further promotion on the basis of accelerated seniority. The grievance of the applicants is that the bifurcation made by the railways, as stated above, is not in consonance with the constitutional scheme and the judgment of the Honble Supreme Court has not been properly implemented. It is urged that the entire basis of the interpretation taken by the railways is based on an erroneous interpretation of the judgment of the Honble Supreme Court in
Virpal Singh Chauhan
(supra).

It is also the case of the applicants that the judgment of the Honble Supreme Court in
Indra Sawhney v Union of India
[1992 Supp (3) SCC 217] is a good law, and inasmuch as, it has been held in
the said judgment
that the power to make reservation in promotion cannot be traced to
Article 16(4)
, or in other words,
Article 16(4)
does not permit reservation in promotion, all promotions given to reserved category candidates prior to 17.6.1995 ought to be treated as ad hoc in terms of the judgment in
Ajit Singh v State of Punjab
[(1999) 7 SCC 209]. The promotees, it is urged, would not be entitled to the additional benefit of seniority on the basis of such promotions against reserved post on the roster. The period prior to 17.6.1995 is before the Seventy-seventh Constitution Amendment. It is the case of the applicants that the Seventy-seventh amendment brought about a new regime of empowering the State to provide for reservation in promotions for the first time, and, therefore, promotions in reservations prior to the said period ought to be considered as promotions individually made, and such additional benefit of accelerated seniority could not be given to such employees. Insofar as, the period from 17.6.1995 to 8.3.2002 is concerned, the plea of the applicants is that during the said period, though the power subsisted (in view of the retrospective amendment by the 85th Constitution Amendment), the power being an enabling power was never exercised and, therefore, even where promotions are made during the said period, consequential seniority cannot be conferred.

It is the case of the applicants that letter dated 8.3.2002 cannot be permitted to operate retrospectively from 17.6.1995 so as to confer the benefit retrospectively, and in any case, since the 77th Constitution Amendment as well as the 85th Constitution Amendment have been upheld by the Honble Supreme Court in the case of
M. Nagaraj
(supra) subject to conditions laid down therein, unless the State can show existence of compelling reasons, i.e., backwardness and inadequacy of representation, the enabling power cannot be exercised and that too, retrospectively. It is the case of the applicants that the letter dated 8.3.2002 is without complying with the conditions
laid down in
M. Nagarajs case and, therefore, the said order cannot be sustained. Insofar as, the period after 8.3.2002 is concerned, it is the case of the applicants that the conditions precedent for applicability of accelerated promotion, which has been held to be intra vires, have not been complied with, and, therefore, accelerated promotion cannot be conferred upon the reserved category candidates.

5.	The respondents pursuant to notice issued by this Tribunal have entered appearance and filed replies hotly contesting the cause of the applicants. We may mention at this stage that when this matter came up before the Division Bench then seized of the matter, vide order dated 1.5.2009, in view of the importance of the issues raised and their wide ramifications, the Bench referred the matter to a larger Bench for authoritative pronouncement on the issues. That is how the matter is before us. We may also mention that when the matter came up before us on 9.12.2009, while observing that the primary challenge in the present OA is to circulars
referred to above
, which, we were informed during the course of arguments, are based upon suggestion/circulars issued by DOP&T, the first respondent, and since no one had chosen to appear on behalf of the first respondent, we desired to have the view point of the said respondent, the issue being important having far reaching consequences. We thus ordered service upon the first respondent through Secretary, DOP&T by the next date of hearing. Shri V.S.R. Krishna, the learned counsel stated during hearing that he would ensure filing of reply by the first respondent by the next date of hearing. Vide order dated 22.3.2010, while mentioning that the controversy involved in the present case has far reaching consequences and the issues involved are of importance, we expected assistance of the Additional Solicitor General of India. The learned ASG has appeared and addressed arguments.

6.	We may now make mention of the respective replies filed by the respondents and rejoinders of the applicant, insofar as they may be relevant to comment and adjudicate upon the controversy involved in the case. We are not making an elaborate mention of the pleadings in the replies and rejoinders inasmuch as, the issues raised in this case are purely legal and, be it the applicants or the respondents, while making their respective contentions, the learned counsel representing them have by and large relied upon the instructions issued from time to time and judicial precedents touching upon the issues involved in the case. The first reply available on records is filed by respondents 1 to 6. By way of preliminary objections, it is pleaded that the applicants have challenged Railway Boards circulars
referred to above
, which were issued by the Board regarding revision/assignment of seniority of Government servants by applying the 85th Constitution Amendment and judgments of the Honble Supreme Court in that regard. As per the 85th Constitution Amendment, it is pleaded, the seniority of SC/ST railway servants is to be determined from the date of entry into the grade, however, in regard to the seniority in non-selection posts, seniority is being determined on the basis of Boards instructions contained in its letter dated 6.5.2005.

It has been averred that in the matter of
Union of India v Pushpa Rani
[(2008) 9 SCC 42], the Honble Supreme Court has upheld the validity of reservation in the cadre restructuring. In view of the averments as stated above, it is pleaded that the OA needs outright dismissal. It is then pleaded that no cause of action has accrued in favour of the applicants and the OA is totally devoid of merits, and that the OA is misconceived and not maintainable under law. While giving reply on merits, it has been reiterated that the impugned circulars have been issued by applying the 85th Constitution Amendment and the judgments of the Honble Supreme Court in that behalf. The 85th Constitution Amendment Act, 2001, it is pleaded, would require seniority of SC/ST railway servants to be determined from the date of entry into the grade. However, seniority in the non-selection posts is being determined on the basis of Boards instructions contained in letter dated 6.5.2005. It is denied that the applicants have a common cause of action. The applicants, it is stated, have no common grievance.

The judgment of the Honble Supreme Court in
Virpal Singh Chauhan
(supra), it is stated, would not be applicable after the 85th Constitution Amendment. It is then pleaded that the position was reviewed subsequent to the judgment of the Honble Supreme Court in Virpal Singh Chauhan, and it was decided vide DOP&T OM dated 30.1.1997 to modify the existing policy by addition of the proviso to general principle 5(i) contained in MHA (now DOP&T) OM dated 22.12.1959 and para 2.2 in DOP&T OM dated 3.7.1986, which stipulated that if an employee belonging to the SC or ST is promoted to an immediate higher post/grade against a reserved vacancy earlier than his senior general/OBC employee who is promoted later to the said immediate higher post/grade, the general/OBC employee would regain his seniority, over such earlier promoted employee of SC/ST in immediate higher post/grade. It is, however, further stated that the Government has now decided to negate the effect of DOP&T OM dated 30.1.1997 by amending
Article 16(4A)
of the Constitution right from the date of its inclusion in the Constitution, i.e., 17.6.1995, with a view that Government servants belonging to SC/ST would maintain their seniority in case of promotion by virtue of rule of reservation. In other words, the employees belonging to general/OBC categories promoted later will be placed junior to SC/ST employees promoted earlier, even though by virtue of rule of reservation. Therefore, in pursuance of the 85th Amendment, it has been decided as follows:

(i)	(a) SC/ST Govt. servants shall on their promotion by virtue of rule of reservation/roster be entitled to consequential seniority also and

(b
)
the above decision
shall be effective from 17.06.95.

(ii)	The instructions contained in DOPT O.M. No.20011/1/96-Estt.(D) dated 30.01.97 as well as the clarifications contained in DOPT O.M. No.2011/2/97-Estt.(D) dated 21.03.97 shall stand withdrawn w.e.f. 30.01.1997 itself.

(iii)	Seniority of Govt. servants determined in the light of O.M. dated 30.01.1997 shall be revised as if that O.M. was never issued.

(iv)	(a) On the basis of revised seniority consequential benefits like promotion, pay, pension etc. should be allowed to the concerned SC/ST Govt. servants (but without arrear by applying principles of no work no pay).

(b) For this purpose senior SC/ST Govt. servants may be granted promotion w.e.f. the date of their immediate junior general/OBC Govt. servants.

(c) Such promotion of SC/ST Govt. servants may be ordered with the approval of Appointing Authority of the post to which the Govt. servant is to be promoted at each level after following normal procedure of DPC.

(v)	Except seniority other consequential benefits like promotion, pay etc. (including retiral benefits in respect of those who have already retired allowed to general/OBC govt. servants by virtue of O.M. dated 30.01.1997 and/or in pursuance of the directions of CAT/Court should be protected as personal to them.

(vi)	All Ministries/Departments are requested to bring
the above decision
to the notice of all concerned for guidance and compliance.

Necessary action to implement the decisions contained in para 4(iii) above may be completed within three months from the date of issue of these instructions and necessary action to implement the decision at para (iv) above may be completed within 6 months from the date of issue of these instructions.

It is pleaded that para 3(iii) of the letter dated 8.3.2002would indicate that since the earlier instructions issued pursuant to the judgment of the Honble Supreme Court in
Virpal Singh Chauhan
(supra) as incorporated in para 319A of IREM Vol.I were effective from 10.2.1995 and the revised instructions issued pursuant to the 85th Constitutional Amendment were being made effective from 17.6.1995, the question as to how the cases falling between 10.2.1995 and 16.6.1995 should be regulated was under consideration in consultation with DOP&T, and that separate instructions in that regard would be issued.

The matter has since been considered and it has been decided vide Boards letter dated 13.1.2005 that since the 85th
Amendment Act, 2001
has been made effective from 17.6.1995, promotions, if any, or railway servants which had taken place during the period from 10.2.1995 to 16.6.1995 as per the principle of regaining seniority by general/OBC staff in terms of procedure in force at that point of time in implementation of Honble Supreme Courts judgment in
R.K. Sabharwal
(supra) and
Virpal Singh Chauhan
(supra) vide Railway Boards letter dated 28.2.1997 and 15.5.1998 may be protected as personal to them. Accordingly, the existing para-3 (iii) of Railway Boards letter dated 08.03.2002 has been substituted, of which we have already made a mention hereinbefore. All orders passed by the Tribunal regarding seniority dispute, it is stated, have been superseded by the 85th Constitutional Amendment. However, seniority determined and promotions effected in between the period 10.2.1995 and 16.6.1995 (both days inclusive) in terms of para 319A IREM in force during the said period, would be protected as personal to the incumbents as per Boards letter dated 13.1.2005. It is denied that instructions have been issued by the Board that staff of general category who were promoted between 10.2.1995 and 16.6.1995 would regain their seniority over SC/ST employees who were promoted earlier. The applicant has filed rejoinder to the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 to 6.

7.	Another reply on behalf of respondents 5 and 6 has been filed, to which the applicants have filed rejoinder. An additional reply has also been filed by respondents 1 to 4 stating that the applicants have introduced some new facts in their rejoinder, which would need a reply. The applicants have filed rejoinder to this additional reply filed on behalf of respondents 1 to 4. Yet another additional reply has been filed on behalf of respondents 5 and 6. The 1st respondent has filed an independent reply as well, which, it appears, has been filed as the Tribunal wanted DOP&T to respond to the OA. It is pleaded therein that Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes constitute the backward class of society, and while discussing the meaning of the expression Backward Class of citizens in
Article 16(4)
, the Supreme Court in the matter of
Indra Sawhney
(supra) made some observations. Such observations have been reproduced in the reply. The observations made by the Supreme Court in depicting the condition of SC/ST have also been reproduced in the reply. It is pleaded that the Scheduled Castes constitute backward class of society and there would be no need of further inquiry to establish this fact, and that the position with regard to Scheduled Tribes is no better. While referring to concept of creamy layer, it is pleaded that the Honble Supreme Court in the matter of Indra Sawhney has made it clear that the discussion about creamy layer is confined to Other Backward Classes (OBCs) and has no relevance in the case of SC/ST. It is then pleaded that the inadequacy of representation is an essential condition for making provision of reservation for any backward class. Adequacy of representation in service is, however, subjective to the satisfaction of the State. In that regard, some observations made in Indra Sawhneys case have been reproduced. It is then pleaded that data has been collected regarding representation of SC/ST in the Central Government services as on 1.1.2006. The same has been given in a tabulated form and reads as follows:

Group	Total number of employees	SCs	%	STs	%
A	114256	14719	12.9	4408	3.9
B	174965	26256	15.0	9939	5.7
C	2078929	340691	16.4	142724	6.9
D (Excluding Sweepers)	825279	153286	18.6	58377	7.1
Sweepers	83061	49279	59.3	4560	5.5
Total (Excluding Sweepers)	3193429	534952	16.75	215448	6.75
Total (Including Sweepers)	3276490	584231	17.83	220008	6.71

It is the case of the 1st respondent that according to the 2001 Census, there are 16.2% Scheduled Castes and 8.2% Scheduled Tribes in the population of the country. The table as given by them, it is stated, would show that representation of the SC in Group A and Group B posts and ST in all groups of posts is less than the percentage of their population. The reservation for SC and ST in the Central Government services is 15% and 7.5% respectively, and it is implemented post-based, which means that if representation of SC in a grade becomes 15% they are not given any reservation. Thus the Government, for the purpose of reservation, treats 15% representation of SC as adequate and whenever such adequacy is arrived at, no reservation is provided to that class. The same is true as regards the ST as well. Thus there is an inbuilt system to ensure that reservation to the SC and ST is not given when their representation in a service becomes adequate. Instructions contained in DOP&T OM dated 21.1.1977, as amended from time to time, provide that an unfit person would not be appointed even by reservation. Officers occupying higher positions in services have to perform higher duties and responsibilities. Reservation in promotion is applicable only up to the lowest rung of Group A. There is no reservation in promotion in higher posts. Thus only competent persons are promoted to higher grades, where any relaxation may affect the efficiency of administration, which ensures that efficiency of administration is not compromised. Instructions issued by the government introducing post-based reservation rosters provide that total reservation shall in no case exceed 50%. Reservation for SC, ST and OBC in case of direct recruitment on all India basis by open competition is 15%, 7.5% and 27% respectively, while in case of direct recruitment on all India basis otherwise than by open competition, the reservation is 16.66%, 7.5% and 25.84% respectively. In case of direct recruitment to Groups C and D posts which normally attract candidates from a locality or a region, while percentage of reservation for SC/ST is generally fixed in promotion to the population of SC and ST in the respective States/Union Territories, for OBCs it is fixed keeping in view the proportion of their population in the concerned States/UTs, and the fact that total reservation for SC/ST/OBC remains within the limit of 50%, and reservation for OBC remains within the limit of 27%. Reservation in promotion is available to SC and ST at the ratio of 15% and 7.5% respectively. Thus, reservation does not exceed 50% in any case. The 1st respondent on the basis of the judgment of the Honble Supreme Court in the matter of M. Nagaraj (supra) issued instructions vide letter dated 29.3.2007 clarifying that the observations made in the said case regarding creamy layer amongst the SC/ST are mere obiter dicta, per incurium and would not flow from, and cannot be reconciled with the nine-Judge Bench judgment of the supreme Court in the matter of Indra sawhney (supra), and that these instructions are based on the judgment of the Supreme court in Indra Sawhnays case, which makes it clear that the concept of creamy layer does not apply to the SC/ST.

8.	The applicants have filed rejoinder to the counter reply filed by the 1st respondent, wherein it is stated that the present Application is related to reservation in promotion and consequential seniority thereof. It is pleaded that in the case of reservation in promotion the 9-Judge Constitutional Bench of the Honble Supreme Court in the case of
Indra Sawhney
(supra) observed that the backwardness of a class has no role to play, because promotions are made of individuals and not of the class, and that after joining service the employees of backward class come at par with the general category employees, and further discrimination between general and reserved category employees would amount to treating equals unequally.

Insofar as, the judgment of the Supreme Court in
M. Nagaraj
(supra) is concerned, it is the case of the applicants that the same is related to reservation of SC/ST in the matter of appointments in posts, and, therefore, the findings of the Apex Court on the concept of creamy layer are also confined to SC/ST candidates, and further that in the later judgments in
Nair Service Society v State of Kerala
[(2007) 4 SCC 1] and R. S. Garg v State of Uttar Pradesh [(2006) 6 SCC 106], the Supreme Court has clearly held that the concept of creamy layer is equally applicable in the case of SC/ST and that they have to be excluded for reservation in view of command of
Article 14
of the Constitution. As regards adequate representation of backward classes in service, it is the case of the applicants, that it would mean appointments as per prescribed percentages fixed by the State/Central Governments, and once, the prescribed percentages are achieved, no further reservation would be permissible, and that the opinion of the State to allow reservation must be supported by quantifiable data in regard to short-fall of the backward class in the cadre along with compelling reasons to allow reservation in services, and that this process has not been followed by the respondents before making reservations, and, therefore, all the appointments made under the policy of reservation are bad in the eye of law. It is then pleaded that the respondents have shown figures of all Central Government employees, whereas the applicants are concerned with railway employees only, for whom no data has been given in the reply filed by the respondents, and even otherwise, in the data produced by the respondents, it has been stated that the representation of SC employees in the Central services including railway department, has already been achieved as 15%, 16.4% and 19.6% in groups B, C and D respectively (excluding sweepers), which would clearly indicate that the requisite representation of 15% prescribed for SCs has already been achieved, and even more than that, and, therefore, there is no question of allowing reservation in groups B, C and D services. It is also the case of the applicants that adequate representation does not mean proportionate representation, and that the population of SC/ST has no role to play in the matter of reservation. In the additional affidavit dated 26.4.2010 filed on behalf of the applicants, it has also been stated that the respondents have not carried out any exercise to find out:

(a)	the parameters to determine backwardness which has to be based on objective and quantifiable criteria;

(b)	identification of persons who satisfy the above parameters and also excluding persons or class of persons who form part of the creamy layer;

(c)	laying down benchmarks providing the maximum reservation that can be provided which when achieved would trigger a discontinuation of reservation (either in direct recruitment or in promotions);

(d)	factors to be taken into consideration to maintain overall administrative efficiency i.e. the maximum posts that can be reserved and also identification of areas and avenues which are critical to the working of the organisation and where no reservation could be provided or else the efficiency and the manner of working of the organisation as a whole would suffer;

(e)	the actual representation of such class of persons in the matter of public employment and a comparison with the benchmarks to show compelling state need to exercise powers under
Article 16(4)
or
Article 16(4A);

(f)	setting up a continuous mechanism to see that the benchmarks and thresholds laid down are not breached and as soon as the targets are achieved, reservation is discontinued so as not to cause reverse discrimination and a breach of constitutional requirements.

It is pleaded that these are necessary requirements in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court, which the respondents were required to carry out before providing for, or for that matter, continuation with the policy of reservation in promotions, conferring consequential seniority, etc. It is then pleaded that despite the decision of the Supreme Court, the respondents have not carried out any of the above exercises which would justify the exercise of the enabling power by the authorities, and that the burden to establish the existence of compelling need is on the State, and if the State fails to satisfy the compelling need, it would necessarily mean absence of jurisdictional facts and as such the exercise of power under the enabling provisions would be unsustainable.
Insofar as, reliance by the respondents on the circular dated 2.3.2007 is concerned, it is the case of the applicants that the same is purported to have been issued in compliance of the judgment of the Apex Court in
M. Nagaraj
(supra). It is the case of the applicants that the said circular is not a compliance of the judgment of the Supreme Court, but is merely communication of the operative directions contained therein. No exercise as mentioned above, it is pleaded, has been carried out, which ought to have been carried out as per the directions of the Apex Court before the power could have been exercised, but the State has failed to carry out the exercise even after the judgment.

9.	From the pleadings of the parties, as mentioned above, what appears is that the applicants have challenged the circulars dated 8.3.2002, 13.1.2005 and 29.2.2008, which confer accelerated seniority to the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes automatically as a consequence of their promotion to a higher post against a roster point reserved for such candidates. The identifiable issues for determination appears to be whether the consequential seniority can be conferred to the roster points meant to be occupied by the reserved category candidates for the period even prior to 17.6.1995, i.e., before
Article 16(4A)
came to be inserted by way of
Constitution (Seventy-seventh Amendment) Act, 1995
. The other issue would be as regards the effect of the judgment of the Honble Supreme Court in the case of
Virpal Singh Chauhan
(supra) with reference to prospectivity and the fact that
the said judgment
has been made prospectively from 10.2.1995. Yet another question to be answered would be whether the exercise of the enabling power vested with the Government on 8.3.2002 under
Article 16(4A)
, substituted by the
Constitution (Eighty-fifth Amendment) Act, 2001
, could be exercised retrospectively from 17.6.1995. Yet another question that arises for consideration is that whether there are any pre-conditions necessary for exercise of the enabling power under
Article 16(4A)
, as it now stands, and if at all there are pre-conditions for exercise of such a power, whether they have been complied with, as also as to whether the benefit of accelerated seniority can be given to those who are covered under creamy layer.

10.	Before we may take into consideration the rival contentions of the learned counsel representing the parties, it would be appropriate to mention as to how and why
Article 16(4A)
as inserted by the
Constitution (Seventy-seventh Amendment) Act, 1995
, and substituted by the
Constitution (Eighty-fifth Amendment) Act, 2001
, came into being, and also as to what were, before such insertion and substitution, the provisions dealing with reservation in public employment. Preceding
Article 16
are
Articles 14
and
15.
By virtue of
Article 14
, the State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of India, whereas
Article 15
commands the State that it shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them, and that no citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them, be subjected to any disability, liability, restriction or condition with regard to matters enumerated in sub-clauses (a) and (b) of clause (2) of
Article 15.
The state can, however, not be prevented from making any special provision for women and children, as also from making any special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, as also for advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes, insofar as such special provisions relate to their admission to educational institutions, including private educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the State, other than the minority educational institutes.
Article 16
recognizes equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State, and no citizen, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence or any of them, shall be ineligible for, or discriminated against in respect of any office under the State. The parliament has, however, power to make any law prescribing, in regard to a class or classes of employment or appointment to an office, any requirement as to residence within a particular State or Union Territory prior to such employment or appointment.
Article 16(4)
reads as follows:

(4)	Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State.

It appears that initially when
Article 16(4)
alone was in existence and clause (4A) had not been inserted, there was no provision for reservation in promotion. Reservation was subject to the power under the Constitution only through
Article 16(4)
, but despite there being no source of power available under Constitution for providing reservation in promotions, the State resorted to the same. Litigation in that context surfaced. The Honble Supreme Court in
G. M. Southern Railway v Rangachari
[(1962) 2 SCR 586] repelled the plea raised by the general category candidates that Government would have no power to make reservation in promotions.

The law
laid down by
the Supreme Court in Rangacharis case was overruled by a constitutional Bench comprising the Honble Chief Justice of India and eight Judges in
Indra Sawhney
(supra). The policy of the Government being such so as to provide reservation in promotions as well, the Parliament inserted clause (4A) creating the source of power which enabled the State to make provision for reservation to any class or classes of posts in the services under the State. Once, the source of power was created under the Constitution by virtue of the Seventy-seventh Amendment to provide reservation in promotion, yet another facet of reservation known as accelerated promotion came to fore when roster points were reserved for the reserved category. Conferment of seniority to the roster point promotees is considered in normal service jurisprudence as accelerated seniority. To illustrate, if, for instance, the Government may make a 40-point roster and the slots at numbers 1, 7, 10, 35 and 40 may be reserved for reserved category candidates, such roster point employees belonging to reserved categories would secure promotion before their seniors could be promoted.

This was obviously not to the liking of the general category candidates and thus, as mentioned above, litigation came into being on that score, which culminated into the judgment of the Honble Supreme Court in
Virpal Singh Chauhan
(supra). While, however, approving promotion of reserved category candidates on the roster points, the Honble Supreme Court evolved the principle known as catch up rule, and it was held that as and when a general category candidate who was senior in the feeder category is promoted, he shall re-gain his seniority and would thus become senior to his erstwhile junior of reserved category who was promoted earlier to him because of reservation/roster point. This judgment, it appears, led to substitution of clause (4A) of
Article 16
, which, as it stands today, reads as follows:

(4A)	Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for reservation in matters of promotion, with consequential seniority, to any class or classes of posts in the services under the State in favour of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes which, in the opinion of the State, are not adequately represented in the services under the State.

11.
In the present case, we are concerned only with reservation insofar as, it relates to promotion, and, therefore, we may touch upon only that aspect of the case in the two judgments of the Honble Supreme Court in
Indra Sawhney
(supra) and
Virpal Singh Chauhan
(supra).

The matter as regards
Indra Sawhney
(supra) for its importance and wide ramifications, came up for hearing before a Constitutional Bench of five Judges. A larger Bench of nine Judges had to be constituted considering the nature of the controversy and its ramifications. There are six different opinions expressed by the Honble Judges constituting the Bench. One of the judgments was recorded by Honble Justice B. P. Jeevan Reddy, as he then was, speaking for himself as also for Honble Justice M. H. Kania, CJI, Honble Justice M. N. Venkatachaliah and Honble Justice A. M. Ahmadi, as they then were. Honble Justice S. Ratnavel Pandian, recorded a concurring and separate judgment. Honble (Dr.) Justice T. K. Thommen recorded a separate dissenting judgment. Honble Justice Kuldip Singh also recorded a dissenting judgment separately. Honble Justice P. B. Sawant recorded a concurring and separate judgment. Honble Justice R. M. Sahai recorded a dissenting and separate judgment. The judgment of the Honble Supreme Court as prepared and as has been mentioned above, needs to be touched upon only as regards the aspect of the case involved in the present case, which, as mentioned above, is reservation in promotion and accelerated seniority. We shall deal only with the said aspect of the case from all the separate judgments. The concurrence or dissent also, therefore, shall have to be considered only as regards the aspect of the case as mentioned above. The judgment in the said case came in the backdrop of the report submitted by B. P. Mandal. Initially, by a Presidential order under
Article 340
of the constitution, the first Backward Class Commission known as Kaka Kalekar Commission was set up on January 29. 1953, which submitted its report on March 30, 1955 listing out 2399 castes as socially and educationally backward on the basis of criteria evolved by it, but the Central Government did not accept that report and shelved it. Twenty-four years later after the first Backward Class Commission submitted its report in 1955, the President pursuant to the resolution of the Parliament appointed the second Backward Class Commission on January 1, 1979 under the chairmanship of Shri B. P. Mandal to investigate the conditions of Socially and Economically Backward Classes (SEBCs) within the territory of India. The Commission submitted its report on December 31, 1980, identifying as many as 3743 castes as SEBCs and made its recommendations under chapter XIII of volume I of its report and finally suggested regarding the period of operation of Commissions recommendations, the entire scheme should be reviewed after twenty years. The Commission concluded that excluding Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes (OBCs) constitute nearly 52 per cent of the Indian population. On the basis of the report of the Commission, two office memoranda dated August 13, 1990 and September 25, 1991 came to be issued by the Government of India. The report of the Mandal Commission, as we all know, led to wide-spread agitations throughout the country. Open or general category candidates resorted to number of public protests, strikes, and some of them even committed suicide. Counter rallies and strikes were also carried out by OBC category candidates. It is in this background, when feelings were running high on both sides and the country was on the boil, that the memoranda issued by the Government on the basis of recommendations made by the Mandal Commission, came up for discussion and adjudication by one of the largest Benches constituted in the History of the Indian judiciary. The first memorandum dated 13.8.1990 issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions (Department of Personnel & Training) reads as follows:

Subject:	Recommendation of the Second Backward Classes Commission (Mandal Report)  Reservation for Socially and Educationally Backward Classes in Services under the Government of India.

In a Multiple undulating society like ours, early achievement or the objective of social justice as enshrined in the Constitution is a must. The second Backward Classes Commission called the Mandal Commission was established by the then Government with this purpose in view, which submitted its report to the Government of India on 31.12.1980.

2.	Government have carefully considered the report and the recommendations of the Commission in the present context responding the benefits to be extended to the socially and educationally backward classes as opined by the Commission and are of the clear view that at the outset certain weightage has to be provided to such classes in the services of the Union and their Public Undertakings. Accordingly orders are issued as follows:

(i)	27 per cent of the vacancies in civil posts and services under the Government of India shall be reserved for SEBC.

(ii)	The aforesaid reservation shall apply to vacancies to be filled by direct recruitment. Detailed instructions relating to the procedure to be followed for enforcing reservation will be issued separately.

(iii)	Candidates belonging to SEBC recruited on the basis of merit in an open competition on the same standards prescribed for the general candidates shall not be adjusted against the reservation quota of 27 per cent.

(iv)	The SEBC would comprise in the first phase the castes and communities which are common to both, the list in the report of the Mandal Commission and the State Governments lists. A list of such castes/ communities is being issued separately.

(v)	The aforesaid reservation shall take effect from 7.8.1990. However, this will not apply to vacancies where the recruitment process has already been initiated prior to the issue of these orders.

Similar instructions in respect of public sector undertakings and financial institutions including public sector banks will be issued by the Department of Public Enterprises and Ministry of Finance respectively.

The second memorandum which is an amended one dated 25.9.1991, reads as follows:

Subject:	Recommendation of the Second Backward Classes Commission (Mandal Report)  Reservation for Socially and Educationally Backward Classes in Services under the Government of India.

The undersigned is directed to invite the attention to O.M. of even number dated the 13th August 1990, on the above sections of the SEBCs to receive the benefits of reservation on a preferential basis and to provide reservation for other economically backward sections of the people not covered by any of the existing schemes of reservation, Government have decided to amend the said Memorandum with immediate effect as follows:-

2.(i)	Within the 27 per cent of the vacancies in civil posts and services under the Government of India reserved for SEBCs, preference shall be given to candidates belonging to the poorer sections of the SEBCs. In case sufficient number of such candidates are not available, unfilled vacancies shall be filled by the other SEBC candidates.

(ii)	10 per cent of the vacancies in civil posts and services under the Government of India shall be reserved for other economically backward sections of the people who are not covered by any of the existing schemes of reservation.

(iii)	The criteria for determining the poorer sections of the SEBCs or the other economically backward sections of the people who are not covered by any of the existing schemes of reservations are being issued separately.

3.	The O.M. of even number dated the 13th August 1990, shall be deemed to have been amended to the extent specified above.

In the judgment authored by Justice B. P. Jeevan Reddy, for self and others, as mentioned above, the learned counsel for parties had framed eight questions, which have been mentioned in para 681 of the judgment. For the sake of convenient discussion and in the interest of clarity, the Honble Judge, however, framed eleven questions in para 682 of the judgment. The question as may be relevant for this case would be question number 7. The same reads as follows:

7.	Whether
Article 16
permits reservations being provided in the matter of promotions?

The conclusion arrived at on the question aforesaid in paragraph 859(7) of the judgment reads as follows:

(7)
Article 16(4)
does not permit provision for reservations in the matter of promotion. This rule shall, however, have only prospective operation and shall not affect the promotion already made, whether made on regular basis or on any other basis. We direct that our decision on this question shall operate only prospectively and shall not affect promotions already made, whether on temporary, officiating or regular/permanent basis. It is further directed that wherever reservations are already provided in the matter of promotion  be it Central Services or State Services, or for that matter services under any Corporation, authority or body falling under the definition of State in
Article 12
 such reservations may continue in operation for a period of five years from this day. Within this period it would be open to the appropriate authorities to revise, modify or re-issue the relevant rules to ensure the achievement of the objective of
Article 16 (4).
If any authority thinks that for ensuring adequate representation of backward class of citizens in any service, class or category, it is necessary to provide for direct recruitment therein, it shall be open to it to do so. (Ahmedi, J expresses no opinion on this question upholding the preliminary objection of Union of India). It would not be permissible for the State to extend concession and relaxation to the members of reserved categories in the matter of promotion without compromising the efficiency of the administration.

Honble Justice S. Ratnavel Pandian, in summation of his opinion, in para 243, on the question in controversy at serial number (10) on the said summation, observed as follows:

(10)	As regards the reservation in the matter of promotion under
Article 16(4)
, I am in agreement with conclusion No.(7) made in paragraph 859 in Part VII of the judgment of my learned brother, B.P. Jeevan Reddy, J.

Honble Justice Thommen, in the summary of his opinion contained in para 323, as regards reservation in promotion at serial number (9) of the summary, observed as follows:

(9) Reservation has no application to promotion. It is confined to initial appointment, whichever be the level or grade at which such appointment is made in the administrative hierarchy, and whether or not the post in question is borne on the cadre of the service.

In the conclusion arrived at by the Honble Judge in para 324(D), it was observed, thus:

(D)	Reservation is confined to initial appointment to a post and has no application to promotion.

Honble Justice Kuldip Singh framed question (D) for answer in para 329, as follows:

D.	Whether
Article 16(4)
permits reservation of appointments or posts at the stage of initial entry into government services or even in the process of promotion?

The said question was answered in para 381 by observing as follows:

381. For the reasons indicated above I hold that the interpretation given by the majority in
Rangachari*
case to
Article 16(4)
, to the effect that it permits reservations in the process of promotion, is not permissible and as such cannot be sustained.

Rangachari
case to that extent is overruled. I hold that
Article 16(4)
permits reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens only at the initial stage of entry into the State services.

Article 16(4)
does not permit reservation either to the selection posts or in any other manner in the process of promotion. (
*General Manager, S.Rly v Rangachari
, (1962) 2 SCR 586: AIR 1962 SC 36).

Honble Justice Sawant dealt with the matter in question No.VIII, which reads as follows:

Would reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any Backward Class be restricted to the initial appointment to the post or would it extend to promotions as well?

The question was answered by observing as follows:

549.	 There is no doubt that the meaning of the various expressions used in
Article 16
, viz., matters relating to employment or appointment to any office, any employment or office and appointments or posts cannot be whittled down to mean only initial recruitment and hence the normal rule of the service jurisprudence of the loss of the birth marks cannot be applied to the appointments made under the article. However, as pointed out earlier, the exclusive quota is not the only form of reservation and where the resort to it such as in the promotions, results in the inefficiency of the administration, it is illegal. But that is not the end of the road nor is a backward class employee helpless on account of its absence. Once he gets an equal opportunity to show his talent by coming into the mainstream, all he needs is the facility to achieve equal results. The facilities can be and must be given to him in the form of concessions, exemptions etc. such as relaxation of age, extra attempts for passing the examinations, extra training period etc. along with the machinery for impartial assessment as stated above. Such facilities when given are also a part of the reservation programme and do not fall foul of the requirement of the efficiency of the administration. Such facilities, however, are imperative if, not only the equality of opportunity but also the equality of results is to be achieved which is the true meaning of the right to equality.

Honble Justice R. M. Sahai, in his conclusions at serial number (6) in paragraph 635 of the judgment held as follows:

(6) Reservation in promotion is constitutionally impermissible as, once the advantaged and disadvantaged are made equal and are brought in one class or group then any further benefit extended for promotion on the inequality existing prior to be brought in the group would be treating equals unequally. It would not be eradicating the effects of past discrimination but perpetuating it.

From the observations and findings of the Honble Judges as reproduced above, it is absolutely clear and there is no dispute either on the point that reservation in promotion is not permissible having not been contemplated under
Article 16(4)
of the Constitution. We may briefly touch upon the reasons for the conclusions as reproduced above. The main reason recorded for the conclusions as mentioned above is that a conjoint reading of
Article 16(4)
with
Article 335
, which deals with requirement of maintenance of efficiency of administration, would necessitate exclusion of reservation in promotion, and that providing reservation in promotions would amount to unduly and unfairly discriminating persons who are already in the service and are senior and no less meritorious in comparison to the reserved candidates, as also that once a person gets into service, he comes at par with other general category candidates and thereafter there cannot be further discrimination among equals. In the reasons, it is also mentioned that right of promotion or being considered for promotion is not a class right or a group right, but promotion is of an individual and, therefore, group backwardness or class backwardness would have no role in matters of promotion.

12.	The wish of the Parliament, however, being that reservation in promotion was need of the hour, it resorted to the power vested in it under
Article 368
of amending the Constitution by inserting
Article 16(4A)
, which has since already been reproduced hereinbefore. Perusal of
Article 16(4A)
would clearly manifest that the same is an enabling provision empowering the State for providing reservation in matters of promotion in favour of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, which may be exercised only when the State may be of the opinion that the reserved class is not adequately represented in the services under it.
Article 16(4A)
as inserted vide 77th Constitutional Amendment came in for debate before the Honble Supreme Court in the matter of
Virpal Singh Chauhan
(supra). The facts of the case aforesaid reveal that a writ came to be filed by general category candidates before the High Court which was transferred to the Central Administrative Tribunal, Allahabad Bench. The railway administration as well as the employees belonging to reserved categories, i.e., SC/ST employees were employed as respondents. The pleadings in the writ petition would reveal that amongst the categories of Guards in the railway service, there were four categories, viz., Grade C, Grade B, Grade A and Grade A Special. Initial recruitment was made to Grade C and they had to ascend rung after rung to go upwards. The promotion from one grade to another in this category was by seniority-cum-suitability. The rule of reservation was being applied not only at the initial stage of appointment to Grade C but at every stage of promotion, the percentage reserved for SC being 15% and for ST 7.5%, i.e., total of 22.5%. To give effect to the rule of reservation, a forty-point roster was prepared in which certain points were reserved for SC and ST respectively, commensurate with the percentage of reservation in their favour. In the year 1986, the position was that both the petitioners in the Original Application (general candidates) and the party-respondents (members of SC/ST) were in the grade of Guards Grade A in the railways. On 1.8.1986 the Chief Controller passed orders promoting certain general candidates on ad hoc basis to Grade A Special. Within less than three months, however, they were sought to be reverted and in their place, members of SC/ST were sought to be promoted. Complaining that such a course of action was illegal, arbitrary and unconstitutional, the general candidates approached the High Court, which petition, as mentioned above, came to be transferred to the Tribunal. The general candidates asked reliefs such as to restrain the railway authorities from filling up the posts in higher grades by applying the rule of reservation, as also from acting upon the illegal seniority list prepared by them, and to declare that the petitioners (general candidates) were entitled to be promoted and confirmed in Grade A Special on the strength of their seniority earlier to the reserved category employees. It was urged on their behalf that once the quota prescribed for a reserved category is satisfied, the rule of reservation  or the forty-point roster prepared to give effect to the said rule  could not be applied or followed any longer, and that the forty-point roster is prepared only to give effect to the rule of reservation, and that it may provide for accelerated promotion but it could not give seniority also to a reserved category candidate in the promoted category. It was further urged that seniority in Grade C should govern and should be reflected in all subsequent grades notwithstanding the earlier promotion of the members of reserved categories. In other words, even if a reserved category member was to be promoted from Grade C to Grade B earlier than his senior general candidate, the position should be that when the general candidate also gets promoted later to Grade B, he should regain his seniority over the reserved candidate in Grade B, which would mean that in Grade B the general candidate again becomes senior to the reserved category candidate. It was submitted that this should be the rule to be followed to ensure that command of
Articles 14
and
of the Constitution prevails. The contention raised on behalf of the general candidates was accepted. The term consequential seniority, it was held, is used interchangeably with accelerated seniority. We may reproduce the relevant observations in that regard. The same read as follows:

It is the seniority in this panel which must be reflected in each of the higher grades. This means that while the rule of reservation gives accelerated promotion, it does not give the accelerated  or what may be called, the consequential  seniority
In short, it is open to the State, if it is so advised, to say that while the rule of reservation shall be applied and the roster followed in the matter of promotions to or within a particular service, class or category, the candidate promoted earlier by virtue of rule of reservation/roster shall not be entitled to seniority over his senior in the feeder category and that as and when a general candidate who was senior to him in the feeder category is promoted, such general candidate will regain his seniority over the reserved candidate notwithstanding that he is promoted subsequent to the reserved candidate. There is no unconstitutionality involved in this.

The Honble Supreme Court thus evolved the rule known as catch up rule. In Ajit Singh Januja (II) v State of Punjab [(1999) 7 SCC 209], the issue was finally decided. It was held therein that the roster point promotees are not entitled to seniority when they are promoted earlier than their senior general category counterparts, and as per the catch up rule, when senior general category candidate is also promoted subsequently to the same level as the roster point promotee, the general category candidate would regain his seniority. It appears that the Parliament wished to give accelerated seniority to reserved category candidates, and that being so, it resorted to amendment in the Constitution by the 85th Amendment, by inserting the words in matters of promotion, with consequential seniority in the existing
Article 16(4A)
w.e.f. 17.6.1995.
Article 16(4A)
as it stands today, has already been reproduced hereinbefore. This amendment was challenged before the Honble Supreme Court in M. Nagarajs case (supra). We shall make a mention of the facts of the case in M. Nagaraj and the conditions subject to which the provision under challenge was protected, in the later part of the judgment.

13.	The issues raised by the learned counsel representing the applicants for the reliefs asked for in the present Application have since already been indicated. We may, however, deal first with the main plea raised by the learned counsel that unless the parameters as culled out by the Honble Supreme Court in
M. Nagaraj
(supra), subject to which only the constitutional amendments have been upheld, are taken care of, the reserved category candidates cannot be given accelerated promotion.

14.	Mr. Tripathi, learned ASG states that the question posed by the applicants to be answered by this Tribunal is that whether while providing reservation for Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes in promotional avenues in a manner so as to take away the benefit of catch up rule from eligible and successful candidates of general category the requirements of paras 110, 117 and 121 to 123 of the judgment of Honble Supreme Court in M. Nagarajs case (supra) have been fulfilled or not? He, at the very outset, contends that insofar as exclusion of creamy layer for reservation in promotion is concerned, the same would not be applicable to scheduled castes/scheduled tribes which category alone has been referred to in
Article 16(4A)
of the Constitution. It is urged that this Tribunal may examine various parameters provided by Honble Supreme Court in M.Nagarajs case (supra) for providing accelerated promotion by reservation, but such tests or pre-conditions would not be applicable insofar as scheduled castes/scheduled tribes are concerned. Learned counsel for the applicant would join serious issues with the learned ASG on the plea raised by him as mentioned above and would contend that vires of
Article 16(4A)
were specifically in question before the Honble Supreme Court in M.Nagarajs case (supra), and, therefore, the pre-conditions
laid down in
the judgment cannot be said to be inapplicable to scheduled castes/scheduled tribes categories.

15.	The question raised by learned ASG being a sort of preliminary objection, we may deal with the same in the first instance before we may advert to the main controversy as regards fulfilling the conditions subject to which alone the challenged provisions of the Constitution before the Honble Supreme Court in M.Nagarajs case(supra) were protected.

16. The question raised by learned ASG, as mentioned above, has been canvassed on the basis of judicial precedents and provisions of
Articles 341
and
of the Constitution of India. Before we may, however, refer to the same, it would be appropriate to find out as to what were the issues that came to be framed by the Honble Supreme Court in M.Nagrajs case, and what decision has been rendered on the said issues. In a writ that came to be filed in Honble Supreme Court seeking to quash the Constitution (85th
Amendment) Act, 2001
inserting
Article 16(4A)
retrospectively from 17.06.1995 providing for reservation in promotion with consequential seniority as being unconstitutional and violative of basic structure, one of the arguments raised in challenging the said amendment was that it seeks to alter the fundamental right of equality which is a part of basic structure of the Constitution. It was urged that equality in the context of
Article 16(1)
connotes accelerated promotion which was not to include consequential seniority, and thereby attaching of consequential seniority to accelerated promotion would violate the equality in
Article 14
read with
Article 16(1)
of the Constitution. It was also urged that the same would impair efficiency. The challenge was also to Constitution (77th Amendment) Act, 1995. It was urged that if accelerated seniority is given to the roster point promotees, the consequences would be disastrous. The consequences of the impugned 85th Amendment which provides for reservation in promotion with consequential seniority would result in reverse discrimination in the percentage of representation of the reserved category officers in the higher cadre.

16.	While considering the contentions as mentioned above on the basis of
Article 16 (1)
, 16(4)
and
of the Constitution of India, in the context of challenge to the 85th amendment of the Constitution and in view of the provisions contained in
Article 14
, it was observed that, enabling provisions are permissive in nature. These are enacted to balance equality with positive discrimination. The constitutional law is the law of evolving concepts. Some of them are generic, others have to be identified and valued. The enabling provisions deal with the concept, which has to be identified and valued as in the case of access vis-a-vis efficiency, which depend on the fact situation only and not abstract principle of equality in
Article 14
as spelt out in detail in
Articles 15

& 16.
Equality before the law, guaranteed by the first part of
Article 14
, is a negative concept while the second part is a positive concept which is enough to validate equalizing measures depending upon the fact situation. While dealing with the test to judge the validity of the impugned State Acts, it was observed as follows:-

As stated above, the boundaries of the width of the power, namely the ceiling limit of 50% (the numerical benchmark), the principle of creamy layer, the compelling reasons, namely, backwardness, inadequacy of representation and the overall administrative efficiency are not obliterated by the impugned amendments.
The other pertinent observations read as follows:-

Therefore, in our view, equality as a concept is retained even under
Article 16(4A)
which is carved out of
Article 16(4).

xxx xxx xxx
The test for judging the width of the power and the test for adjudicating the exercise of power by the concerned State are two different tests which warrant two different judicial approaches. In the present case, as stated above, we are required to test the width of the power under the impugned amendments. Therefore, we have to apply the width test. In applying the the width test we have to see whether the impugned amendments obliterate the constitutional limitations mentioned in
Article 16(4)
, namely, backwardness and inadequacy of representation. As stated above, these limitations are not obliterated by the impugned amendments. However, the question still remains whether the concerned States has identified and valued the circumstances justifying it to make reservation. This question has to be decided case-wise. There are numerous petitions pending in this Court in which reservations made under State enactments have been challenged as excessive. The extent of reservation has to be decided on facts of each case. The judgment in Indra Sawhney does not deal with constitutional amendments. In our present judgment, we are upholding the validity of the constitutional amendments subject to the limitations. Therefore, in each case, the Court has got to be satisfied that the State has exercised its opinion in making reservations in promotions for SCs and STs and for which the concerned State will have to place before the Court the requisite quantifiable data in each case and satisfy the Court that such reservations became necessary on account of inadequacy of representation of SCs/STs in a particular class or clauses of posts without affecting general efficiency of service as mandated under
Article 335
of the Constitution (emphasis supplied).

xxx xxx xxx
Reservation is not in issue. What is in issue is the extent of reservation. If the extent of reservation is excessive, then it makes an inroad into the principles of equality in
Article 16(1).
Extent of reservation, as stated above, will depend on the facts of each case. Backwardness and inadequacy of representation are compelling reasons for the State Governments to provide representation in public employment. Therefore, if in a given case, the court finds excessive reservation under the State enactment, then such an enactment would be liable to be struck down since it would amount to derogation of the above constitutional requirements.

While concluding the judgment, it was observed thus:

The impugned constitutional amendments by which
Articles 16(4A)
and
16 (4B)
have been inserted flow from
Article 16(4).
They do not alter the structure of
Article 16(4).
They retain the controlling factors or the compelling reasons, namely, backwardness and inadequacy of representation which enables the States to provide for reservation keeping in mind the overall efficiency of the State administration under
Article 335.
These impugned amendments are confined only to SCs and STs. They do not obliterate any of the constitutional requirements, namely, ceiling limit of 50% (quantitative limitation), the concept of creamy layer (qualitative exclusion), the sub-classification between OBC on one hand and SCs and STs on the other hand as held in Indra Sawhney, the concept of post-based Roster with in-built concept of replacement as held in R.K. Sabharwal.(Emphasis supplied).

17.	In the context of the question involved, debated and determined by Honble Supreme Court and the law laid down as mentioned and reproduced above, it does not appear as if there are general observations for exclusion of the creamy layer as may pertain to SCs and STs categories as is the contention of learned ASG. The vires of
Article 16(4A)
were specifically in question and a clear finding has been recorded that the impugned amendments are confined to SCs and STs and they do not obliterate any of the constitutional requirements, namely, ceiling limit of 50% (quantitative limitation), the concept of creamy layer (qualitative exclusion), the sub-classification between OBC on one and SCs and STs on the other hand. Learned ASG, however, in his endeavour to show that observations as mentioned above are only general in nature without there being a specific question in that regard before Honble Supreme Court in M. Nagarajs case (supra), places reliance on a judgment of Constitution Bench of Honble Supreme Court in
Ashoka Kumar Thakur v Union of India & Others
, 2008 (6) SCC p.1. The facts of the case aforesaid reveal that challenge therein was to the
Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment) Act, 2005
by which
Article 15 (5)
was inserted in the Constitution. The same reads as follows:-

15(5)	Nothing in this article or in sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of
article 19
shall prevent the State from making any special provision, by law, for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in so far as such special provisions relate to their admission to educational institutions including private educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the State, other than the minority educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of article 30.

18. The Parliament, after the
Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment) Act, 2005
, passed
Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006
. The challenge was also to some of the provisions of the Act (5 of 2007). The Constitution Bench consisting of five Honble Judges delivered the judgment which contained a separate judgment recorded by the then Honble Chief Justice, a separate judgment of Honble Justice Arijit Pasayat for self and Honble Justice C. K. Thakkar, a separate judgment by Honble Justice Dalveer Bhandari, and a separate judgment of Honble R.V. Raveendran. In the judgment authored by the Honble Chief Justice, it has been observed that even though reservation in favour of SCs and STs was not opposed by the petitioners, reservation of 27% in favour of Other Backward Classes/Socially and Educationally Backward Classes was strongly opposed by various petitioners in the cases. Challenge to the 93rd Amendment of the Constitution was on variety of grounds which have been mentioned by the Honble Chief Justice. The only ground as may be relevant for the purpose of the present case was whether creamy layer principle would be applicable to SCs and STs, which was framed as question number 8. On the question aforesaid, after making mention of the judgments in
State of Kerala v N. M. Thomas
[(1976) 2
SCC 310], Indra Sawhney
(supra),
Virpal Singh Chauhan
(supra), and Ajit Singh (II) (supra), it has been observed in para 182 of the judgment as follows:

182.	 In none of these decisions it is stated that the creamy layer principle would apply to SCs and STs.
In
Indra Sawhney
case it is specifically stated that the creamy layer principle will not apply to STs and SCs.

In
Nagaraj
case in paras 110 and 120 and finally in paras 121, 122 and 123, it is only stated that when considering questions of affirmative action, the larger principle of equality such as 50% ceiling (quantitative limitation) and creamy layer (quantitative exclusion) may be kept in mind.

In
Nagaraj
case it has not been discussed or decided that the creamy layer principle would be applicable to SCs/STs.

Therefore, it cannot be said that the observations made in
Nagaraj
case are contrary to the decision in Indra Sawhney case.

In para 184 it has been observed that So far, this Court has not applied the creamy layer principle to the general principle of equality for the purpose of reservation. The creamy layer so far has been applied only to identify the backward class, as it required certain parameters to determine the backward classes. In the conclusion arrived at in para 228, it has been observed that creamy layer principle is not applicable to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.

Honble Justice Pasayat while authoring the judgment for self and Honble Justice Thakkar, while referring to the judgment in
M. Nagaraj
(supra) observed as follows:

293. Though in
M. Nagaraj
case some observations of general nature have been made so far as the applicability of the principles to the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes are concerned, really that case did not concern with the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Similar is the position here.

The focus on the identity test in
M. Nagaraj
case is unexceptionable

Paras 80 and 110 of M. Nagarajs case (supra) have been reproduced. Honble Justice Dalveer Bhandari in his separate judgment after reproducing para 122 of the judgment in M. Nagarajs case, wherein the ceiling limit of 50%, the concept of creamy layer and the compelling reasons, namely, backwardness, inadequacy of representation and overall administrative efficiencies are held to be constitutional requirements without which the structure of equality of opportunity enshrined in
Article 16
would collapse, proceeded to observe as follows:

It was contended that Nagaraj is obiter in regard to creamy layer exclusion. According to Nagaraj reservation in promotion for SC/ST is contingent on exclusion of the creamy layer (paras 122, 123 and 124). The contention of the Union of India cannot be accepted. The discussion regarding creamy layer is far from obiter in Nagaraj. If the State fails to exclude the SC/ST creamy layer, the reservation must fall. Placing this contingency in the conclusion makes the discussion of creamy layer part of the ratio.

It appears that Justice Bhandari expressed no opinion with regard to applicability of exclusion of creamy layer to SC/ST, but as mentioned above, it was clearly observed in para 389 that the Supreme Court had dealt with the issue of creamy layer as applicable to SCs/STs in
M. Nagaraj
(supra). What clearly emerges from the separate judgments authored by the Honble Judges is that whereas, the Honble Chief Justice observed that the creamy layer would not apply to SCs/STs, and the observations in that regard in M. Nagaraj were only general, Justice Bhandari has clearly observed that the judgment in the said case as regards applicability of creamy layer to SCs/STs is not obiter. Insofar as, the judgment authored by Justice Pasayat for self and Justice Thakkar is concerned, the same in the first sentence of para 293, as reproduced above, would observe that the observations in M. Nagaraj were general in nature, but in the very next sentence it has been mentioned that the focus on identity test in the said case is unexceptionable. Justice Raveendran, as mentioned above, did not express any opinion on the issue. 	Judicial precedents guide us not to place reliance upon any of the observations as made by the Honble Judges as mentioned above, as that was not a point involved, as said by the Honble Chief Justice in the very beginning of the judgment. It would, therefore, be appropriate not to place reliance upon the same. It is too well settled a proposition of law
laid down by
the Honble Supreme Court under
Article 141
is binding upon all courts and tribunals, but a binding precedent would be ratio deci dendi and that would come on issues involved in the case, or where there is a debate and a finding. Once, the issue as to whether the creamy layer would be applicable to SCs/STs was not a question debated, any observation made by any of the Honble Judges would be sub silentio and would not be a binding precedent under
Article 141.

We are of the considered view that to find out as to whether the question of exclusion of creamy layer as regards SCs/STs was involved in
M. Nagaraj
(supra), we should see the judgment in M. Nagaraj itself. We reiterate that vires of
Article 16(4A)
which only deals with SCs/STs was under challenge, and the parameters of pre-conditions on which the said provision was protected include exclusion of creamy layer of SCs/STs. Observations in that regard have since already been reproduced in the earlier part of the judgment.

18.	The Honble Supreme Court has focused on the issue as mentioned above after the judgment in
M. Naaraj
(supra).

We may make a pertinent mention of the judgment of the Honble Supreme Court in
Nair Service Society v State of Kerala
[(2007) 4 SCC 1]. The facts of the case aforesaid reveal that a writ came to be filed in the Kerala High Court questioning the validity of the report commonly known as Mandal Commission Report. The writ was later transferred to the Supreme Court.

In
Indra Sawhney
(supra) the States were directed to identify creamy layer amongst the backward classes and exclude them from the purview of reservation. Pursuant to directions aforesaid, the Union of India appointed a Commission, which issued a memorandum dated 8.9.1993 laying down guidelines for identifying creamy layer, inter alia stipulating that the sons and daughters of persons having gross annual income of Rs.1 lakh or above would be excluded. The State of Kerala did not comply with the said directions. The legislature of the State of Kerala enacted the Kerala Backward Classes (Reservation of Appointments or Posts in the Services under the State) Act, 1995, in terms whereof it was declared that there was no socially advanced section in the State. The petitioner society filed a petition questioning the validity of the said Act.

In para 51 of the judgment, the Court while making reference of its decision in
M. Nagaraj
(supra), reproduced paras 110, 122 and 123 of the judgment. In para 53, it was held as follows:

53.	This Court rationalised the creamy layer rule as a necessary bargain between the competing ends of caste based reservations and the principle of secularism

In the context of the judgment in Indra Sawhneys case (supra), it was held that This Court, thus, has categorically laid down the law that determination of creamy layer is a part of the constitutional scheme. If determination of creamy layer is a part of the constitutional scheme, it appears to us that those who may be covered under the creamy layer criteria, which has to be determined by each State, whether they belong to OBC or SC/ST categories, would not make any difference.

19.
In
Anil Chandra & Others v Radha Krishna Gaur & Others
[(2009) 9 SCC 454], the Supreme Court was directly dealing with reservation in promotion to SCs/STs. The facts of the case reveal that in the year 1973, the Government provided reservation in the matter of promotion for SCs and STs. Subsequently U.P. Jal Nigam adopted the U.P. Government Servants Seniority Rules, 1991. The said rules were notified on 20.3.1991. The service conditions of employees of the Nigam were governed by U.P. Jal Nigam Engineers (Public Health Branch) Service Regulations, 1978. The said regulations were made in exercise of the powers conferred on the Nigam under
Sections 97(2)
and
98(1)
of the U.P. Water Supply and Sewerage Act, 1975. In the year 1994, the Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes) Act, 1994 was promulgated, and Section 3(7) of the said Act stated that if on the case of commencement of the Act, reservation was in force under government orders for appointment to posts to be filled up by promotion, such government orders would continue to be applicable till they are modified or revoked. On 10.10.1994 the percentage of reservation in the matter of SCs was enhanced from 18% to 21% by means of government order referring to
Section 3(7)
of the Act of 1994.
Article 16(4A)
, as mentioned above, was introduced by way of amendment in the Constitution w.e.f. 17.6.1995. The respondents before the Supreme Court who were working on the posts of Superintending Engineers, Executive Engineers and Assistant Engineers in U.P. Jal Nigam, aggrieved by the seniority list which came into being by giving benefit of reservation to SC/ST in promotion, filed a writ petition assailing the validity of the U.P. Government Servants Seniority (Third Amendment) Rules, 2007, by virtue of which rule 8-A was inserted in the U.P. Government Servants Seniority Rules, 1991, whereby government servants belonging to SCs and STs were to be entitled to consequential seniority on accelerated promotion given to them through roster/rule of reservation. The matter came up before a Division Bench of the High Court of Allahabad at Lucknow Bench, and by way of interim directions, the court directed that seniority of the respondents as existing prior to the enforcement of the Rules of 2007 would not be disturbed in pursuance of the Rules. In yet another writ petition, similar interim directions were issued. It was a case where against the interim orders passed by the High Court, SLP came to be filed before the Supreme Court. The interim directions made by the High Court were set aside. The High Court was asked to dispose of the writ petition preferably within two months. The appellants before the Supreme Court moved an application before the High Court for their impleadment, which was allowed. When the appellants were impleaded as party respondents, it appears that they filed SLP before the Honble Supreme Court. The Supreme Court observed that in the facts and circumstances of the case, it was of the view that it was the constitutional obligation of the State, at the time of providing reservation in the matter of promotion to identify the class or classes of posts in the service for which reservation is required, but neither any effort had been made to identify the class or classes of posts nor any exercise had been done to quantify the extent of reservation. It was also observed that adequate representation does not mean proportional representation.

Para 123 of the judgment in
M. Nagaraj
(supra) was reproduced, wherein it has been specifically held that the State is not bound to make reservation for SCs/STs in matters of promotions, however, if they wish to exercise their discretion and make such provision, the State has to collect quantifiable data showing backwardness of the class and inadequacy of representation of that class in public employment in addition to compliance with
Article 335
of the Constitution. M. Nagarajs case was thus made applicable to SC/ST candidates as well.

20.	A Division Bench of the High court of Himachal Pradesh in the matter of H. P. Samanya Varg Karamchari Kalyan Mahasangh v State of H.P. and others [CWP-T No.2628 of 2008, decided on 18.9.2009] dealt with the very question involved in the present case. Brief facts of the case reveal that challenge in the writ petition was posed to the validity of instructions dated 7.9.2007 issued by the State of Himachal Pradesh providing for reservation in the matter of promotions with consequential seniority in all classes of posts in the services under the State in favour of the SCs and STs. By the said instructions the State had taken a decision to make reservation in promotion for SCs and STs in terms of the provisions contained in
Articles 16(4)
, 16(4A)
and
16(4B)
of the Constitution.
While issuing the instructions aforesaid, the State had referred to various judgments of the Apex Court, including the judgments in
M. Nagaraj
(supra), and despite that decided that there was no need to collect data as mandated in the said case. While dealing with the concept of creamy layer, the State had issued following directions:

(a) Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes Government servants shall, on their promotion by virtue of rule of reservation/roster, be entitled to consequential seniority with effect from 17.6.1995 retrospectively without introduction of concept of creamy layer as per policy decision of Central Government, contained in Government of India Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, Department of Personnel and Training, letter No.36036/2/2007-Estt.(Res.), dated 29.3.2007.
[
The matter was contested by the State Government as also associations representing SCs, STs and OBCs. The contention raised on behalf of the petitioners was that instructions dated 7.9.2007 would be totally illegal since the State had not collected any data as is mandated by the Apex Court in
M. Nagaraj
(supra). It was also urged that in terms of the conclusion in M. Nagarajs case, the concept of creamy layer would also be applicable to SCs and STs.

After making mention of the judgments of the Supreme Court in
Indra Sawhney
(supra),
Virpal Singh Chauhan
(supra), Ajit Singh Januja (supra) and
R. K. Sabharwal
(supra), tracing briefly the history of relevant amendments brought about in the Constitution, and quoting paras 33, 86, 102, 104, 110, 121, 122 and 123 of the judgment in M. Nagarajs case, the Division Bench held as follows:

From the law
laid down by
the Apex Court in extenso hereinabove, it is clear that the Apex Court has upheld the constitutional amendments but has laid down that this does not obliterate the constitutional requirements of ceiling limit of 50%, the concept of creamy layer, the sub classification between OBCs on the one hand and SCs and STs on the other hand, and the concept of post based roster with inbuilt concept of replacements. It has also been clearly laid down that the State is not bound to make reservations for scheduled castes and scheduled tribes. However, if it chooses to exercise the powers vested in it to make such reservations, the State must collect quantifiable data showing backwardness of the class and inadequacy of representation of that class in public employment. In addition thereto
Article 335
relating to efficiency must be also complied with. It is subject to these guidelines that the constitutional validity of the amendments was upheld.

In the next paragraph, the court in its opinion held that the instructions were totally violative of law
laid down by
the Apex Court, and that as per the judgment in M. Nagaraj the State is bound to collect data to show that the so called backward classes are actually backward and they are inadequately represented in the services under the State. While further dealing with the contention raised on behalf of the petitioners that the observations of the Apex Court in M. Nagaraj in para 121 introduced the concept of creamy layer even with regard to SCs and STs, it was observed that the observations made in the said para are general in nature. It was further observed that in Indra Sawhneys case it was clearly stated that the concept of creamy layer was only applicable to OBCs, and in M. Nagarajs case the Apex Court only stated that the concept of creamy layer should be kept in mind while making reservations, and that it has nowhere been specifically held that the concept of creamy layer would be applicable to SCs and STs as well. The court also observed that the reference made to the concept of creamy layer in para 121 appears to be general observation with regard to the concept of reservation in respect of all classes including OBCs and not in respect of SCs and STs only. The observations as mentioned above would clearly suggest that the reference to general observations made in M. Nagarajs case is as regards applicability of creamy layer concept with regard to all reserved categories, and not only SCs and STs. In the operative part of the order, it has been held that the State is not entitled to make reservation in promotion for SCs and STs. The impugned instructions have been quashed. Once, the very instructions dealing with non-applicability of creamy layer concept to SCs and STs have been held to be illegal, the observations mentioned above as general in nature have to mean that the creamy layer bar is not applicable to SCs and STs only, but is applicable to all reserved categories, as otherwise there was no reason whatsoever to strike down the instructions specifically dealing with non-bar of creamy layer to SCs and STs categories.

21.	A single Bench of the Punjab & Haryana High Court in the matter of
Pritpal Singh v State of Punjab and others
[CWP No.1960 of 2008] decided on 9.9.2009, held that inter se seniority among the general category candidates and reserved category candidates would continue to be determined in view of the judgment in Ajit Singh Januja (supra). Brief facts of the case aforesaid reveal that contest for promotion was between the general category and reserved category of SC candidates. The petitioner who belonged to general category was seeking application of catch-up rule because reserved category employees came to be promoted earlier, even though junior to general category candidates. The Bench after quoting paras 120, 121 and 122 from the judgment in M. Nagarajs case, held as mentioned above. It is no doubt true that the question as to whether creamy layer bar would apply to SCs and STs was not specifically gone into. All that, therefore, we may mention is that the contest was between general and SC candidates, and the judgment of the Supreme Court in M. Nagaraj was held applicable, and if the parameters as pre-conditions mentioned in M. Nagaraj were not gone into, it was held that the earlier law of catch-up rule would hold the field.

22.	A Division Bench of the Rajasthan High Court in State of Rajasthan & others, etc. v Bajrang Lal Sharma & others [Civil Special appeal (Writ) No.3/2010 and connected matters] decided as recently as on 5.2.2010, in a detailed judgment dealt with the issue of seniority between SCs and STs on one hand and general category candidates on the other hand, in the context of judgment of the Supreme Court in
M. Nagaraj
(supra). A writ came to be filed by the members of Rajasthan Administrative Service challenging notification dated 25.4.2008, whereby the State Government, while exercising powers conferred by the proviso to
Article 309
of the Constitution, amended various service rules with effect from 28.12.2002, whereby the following existing proviso to the rule, as mentioned in column 3, was deleted:

Provided that a candidate who has got the benefit of proviso inserted vide Notification No. F.7(1) DOP/A-II/96 dated 01.04.1997 on promotion to an immediate higher post shall not be reverted and his seniority shall remain unaffected. This proviso is subject to final decision of the Honble Supreme Court of India in Writ Petition (Civil) No.234/2002 All India Equality Forum V/s Union of India & Others.

The prayer of the petitioners was also to issue a writ directing the respondents to strictly adhere to the catch-up rule and revise their seniority in comparison to the candidates belonging to SCs and STs after giving the benefit of regaining of the seniority by the general/OBC category candidates, as also to restrain the respondents from providing the consequential seniority to the candidates belonging to the SCs and STs. Deletion of the proviso in various service rules vide notification dated 25.4.2008, it was urged, would amount to giving consequential seniority to the candidates belonging to SCs and STs, which could not have been given without collecting the required quantifiable data to reach to a conclusion that reservation is required in promotion and to show that the State was having any compelling reason, namely, backwardness, inadequacy of representation and that it would not cause any overall administrative efficiency before providing reservation in promotion with consequential seniority, as held by the Honble Supreme Court in
M. Nagaraj
(supra). Since the State Government had not complied with the directions of the Apex Court before issuing the impugned notification, it was urged, the said notification was liable to be quashed being violative of the directions contained in M. Nagarajs case. One of the pleas raised on behalf of the respondents in defending the challenge to the notification
referred to above
was that SC/ST is not a caste but it is a class, and since it is a class based reservation and creamy layer is applicable for OBC and not SC and ST, after upholding of the constitutional validity of 77th and 85th Constitutional Amendments by the Apex Court, nothing remained to be decided. Even though, the contention
referred to above
may not have been specifically rejected, but when the impugned notification was set aside on the basis of judicial precedents, inclusive of the judgment in M. Nagarajs case, from which the Division Bench extensively quoted, the contention as noted above raised on behalf of the respondents shall be deemed to have been rejected.

23.	Before we may part with the aspect of the case that observations made by the Honble Supreme Court in M. Nagarajs case as regards applicability of creamy layer principle to SCs and STs as well are general in nature, as urged by the learned ASG, in all fairness, we may mention that it was urged during the course of arguments and through written note handed over to us after the arguments as well that in
Ashok Kumar Thakur
(supra), the observations contained in M. Nagarajs case about applicability of creamy layer as regards SCs and STs, have to be read in the context of Indra Sawhneys case, as observed by the then Honble Chief Justice, and once there is not specific dissent to the said observations, the concurring judgment of the Honble Chief Justice to the effect that creamy layer has no applicability to SCs and STs should be treated as the majority view.
In that regard, reliance has been placed upon Guardians of Poor v Guardians of Poor [(1889) 24 QBD 117], and Court on its own motion v State & Others [Crl. M.11677/2007 in WP (Crl) No.796/2007, decided on 29.11.2007]. We would have gone into this aspect of the case if the applicability or otherwise of creamy layer to SCs and STs would have been a question framed, debated and adjudicated by the Honble Bench while deciding Ashok Kumar Thakurs case. We have already observed that this was not a question involved, and one of the Honble Judges, Justice Raveendran, has specifically said so. We are unable to agree with the contention raised by the learned ASG that Honble Justice Bhandari had left the question open. In the written note handed over to us, it has been clearly mentioned that the observations of Honble Justice Bhandari in paragraph 389 is that the discussion regarding creamy layer in M. Nagarajs case is far from obiter, and the same are contrary to the observations made by the Honble Chief Justice, and, therefore, it cannot be said that Ashok Kumar Thakur has laid down any decision on the question as to whether M. Nagaraj would apply the test of creamy layer to SC/ST. Despite so saying, it is still stated in the written note that Honble Justice Bhandari has left the question open as to whether creamy layer test will apply to SC/ST. It is also stated in the note that Honble Justice Pasayat speaking for self and Honble Justice Thakkar, has not expressed any view in this regard, and that Honble Justice Raveendran has not dealt with the aspect at all. What thus clearly emerges from the written note is that the views of the Honble Chief Justice and Honble Justice Bhandari are contrary, whereas Honble Justice Pasayat speaking for self and Honble Justice Thakkar, has expressed no opinion, and Honble Justice Raveendran has not dealt with the aspect at all. Once, the question was not in issue nor debated and adjudicated upon, and once there are two contradictory views  one expressed by the Honble Chief Justice and the other by Honble Justice Bhandari, whereas three of the Honble Judges have not expressed any opinion or dealt with the issue, as per the written stand of the learned ASG himself, the plea raised by him that it being a concurring judgment, the view of the Honble Chief Justice would prevail, has to be repelled. That being so, there would be no need to refer to the facts of the two judicial precedents relied upon by the learned ASG, as noted above.

24.	We may also mention that the learned ASG has relied upon the judgment of the Honble Supreme Coourt in
Avinash Singh Bagri & others v Registrar, IIT Delhi & another
[(2009) 8 SCC 220] to urge that the view of the Honble Chief Justice in Ashok Kumar Thakurs case has been validated (as put in the written note) by three Honble Judges in the said case. The facts of the case aforesaid reveal that Avinash Singh Bagri and five others had filed a writ petition in the Apex Court under
Article 32
of the Constitution airing their grievance that most of the SC/ST students who had been given admission in IIT, Delhi, were being denied the right to pursue their studies by the respondent Institute on the ground of poor performance and such students were being expelled and their admissions were being cancelled after one year or two years. A separate writ petition was also filed by two others who were expelled by IIT, Delhi highlighting similar grievance before the Court. The petitioners belonged to reserved categories of SC/ST/OBC. They were students of IIT, Delhi pursuing their BTech course, and had got admission in IIT through all India joint entrance test. They were expelled from the BTech course as they could not make the required average credits in their second year. It was their case that despite providing reservation in higher education like medical and engineering streams, no coaching or any other facilities were provided to SC/ST/OBC candidates to enable them to compete with other general category students, as a result of which more than 90% of such students were dropped out from higher courses in first or second year, resulting in the reserved seats in higher courses lying vacant and unfilled. They gave some statistics as regards the unfilled reserved seats in IIT. After referring to the criteria provided by IIT of securing minimum marks by the general and reserved category candidates at the end of each semester failing which their continuation was to be terminated, mention is then of IITs at Kharagpur, Bombay, Chennai, Guwahati and Roorkee, where such criteria was not provided and no expulsions were being made. For the students of IIT at places aforesaid, if a student was to fail to achieve the required average credits in the first or second year, he/she was not expelled, and for such students, there was a programme known as slow track programme, and if the student cleared a subject, he was awarded with full credits assigned to the subject. In IIT, Delhi, it was mentioned, there was no slow track programme. The petitioners had highlighted their related grievances as well. The respondents defended the criteria so adopted. The facts of the case would unmistakably reveal that the Apex Court was dealing with difficulties being faced by reserved category candidates at IIT, Delhi, which may result into drop out of reserved category students resulting in reserved seats in higher courses having remained vacant and unfilled, and further that the criteria adopted by IIT, Delhi was not adopted by any other IIT in the country. There was no issue whatsoever as regards applicability of creamy layer to SCs and STs. In paragraph 43 of the judgment, it is mentioned that It is not in dispute that SCs and STs are a separate class by themselves and the creamy layer principle is not applicable to them. One sentence on which reliance has been placed by the learned ASG, in itself would show that the observations as above have come to be made by stating that there is no dispute. Surely, if there is no dispute, it would be a case of admission and admission on law would not be binding. In the very next sentence, the Honble Court has referred to
Article 46
of the Constitution which enjoins upon the State to promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people and protect them from social injustice and all forms of exploitation. The need has been stressed in the judgment to take care of socially and educationally backward categories. A direction came to be issued to the respondent Institute to consider the case of petitioners afresh in the light of the various aspects mentioned in the judgment, and in view of the peculiar facts, reappraise their performance taking note of special features available/applicable to the reserved categories and take a decision one way or the other. The plea raised by the learned ASG during the course of arguments as also emanating from the written note that the view of the Honble Chief Justice in M. Nagarajs case has been validated by three Honble Judges in the case of Avinash Singh Bagri is not correct. There is not even a mention in Bagris case of the judgment in M. Nagaraj. We have already mentioned that the law
laid down by
the Honble Supreme Court, as per provisions contained in
Article 141
of the Constitution, is binding upon all courts and tribunals in the country, but this is equally settled a proposition of law that it is the ratio deci dendi or the law laid down which is binding. In the present case, no such law has been laid down, and the observation that creamy layer principle would not be applicable to SCs and STs has been made there being no dispute as regards the same.

25.	We may now deal with the plea raised by the learned ASG that creamy layer principle would not be applicable to SCs and STs in view of
articles 341
and
of the Constitution. The provisions of the Constitution as mentioned above read as follows:

341. Scheduled Castes. - (1) The President may with respect to any State or Union territory, and where it is a State, after consultation with the Governor thereof, by public notification, specify the castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes which shall for the purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Castes in relation to that State or Union territory, as the case may be.

(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of Scheduled Castes specified in a notification issued under clause (1) any caste, race or tribe or part of or group within any caste, race or tribe, but save as aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be varied by any subsequent notification

342. Scheduled Tribes. - (1) The President may with respect to any State or Union territory, and where it is a State, after consultation with the Governor thereof, by public notification, specify the tribes or tribal communities or parts of or groups within tribes or tribal communities which shall for the purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Tribes in relation to that State or Union territory, as the case may be
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of Scheduled Tribes specified in a notification issued under clause (1) any tribe or tribal community or part of or group within any tribe or tribal community, but save as aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be varied by any subsequent notification.

The provisions reproduced above would show that the President may by public notification, specify the castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes which shall for the purposes of the Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Castes in relation to a particular State or Union territory. The Parliament has power by law to include in or exclude from the list of Scheduled Castes specified in a notification issued under
Art.341(1)
any caste, race or tribe or part of or group within any caste, race or tribe, but save as aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be varied by any subsequent notification. Provisions of
Article 342
are similar, but are applicable to Scheduled Tribes. In our considered view, reliance placed on the two Articles of the Constitution, is wholly misplaced. The said Articles do not even remotely touch upon the issue as involved in the present case. The provisions of the Constitution as mentioned above only deal with the powers of the President after necessary consultations to specify castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes, which shall, for the purposes of the Constitution, be deemed to be Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes in relation to a particular State or Union territory. No doubt, special provisions as regards who should be SC or ST have been made in the Constitution, but the same are not at all relatable to exclusion of creamy layer.

26.
In all fairness to the learned ASG, we may mention that reliance has been placed upon the judgment of the Honble Supreme Court in
E. V. Chinnaiah v State of A.P. & others
, etc. [(2005) 1 SCC 394], wherein it has been held that the power of the State to deal with the Scheduled Caste List is totally absent except to bear in mind the required maintenance of efficiency of administration in making or appointments which is found in
Article 335
, and, therefore, any executive action or legislative enactment which interferes, disturbs, rearranges, regroups or reclassifies the various castes found in the Presidential List will be violative of scheme of the Constitution and will be violative of
Article 341
of the Constitution. The judgment relied upon by the learned ASG, in our view, has to be understood in the context of the challenge posed therein. The facts of the case aforesaid, in brevity, reveal that challenge was posed to validity of the
Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Caste (Rationalisation of Reservations) Act, 2000
before the High Court. The writ was dismissed by the High Court by a majority of 4:1. The matter came up before the Supreme Court, the High Court having certified it to be fit case for appeal. The State Government had appointed a Commission headed by a retired Judge to identify the groups amongst the Scheduled Castes found in the list prepared under
Article 341
by the President, who had failed to secure the benefit of the reservations provided for Scheduled Castes in the State in admissions to professional colleges and appointments to public services in the State. The report given by the Honble Judge was accepted by the State resulting into issuance of an ordinance dividing the 57 castes enumerated in the Presidential List into four groups based on inter se backwardness and fixing separate quotas in reservation for each of these groups. Thus, the castes in the Presidential List came to be grouped as A, B, C and D. The 15% reservation for backward classes in the State in educational institutions and in the services of the State under
Articles 15(4)
and
16(4)
of the Constitution of India for SCs were apportioned amongst the four groups in the following manner:

1. Group A : 1%

2.	Group B : 7%

3. Group C : 6%

4.	Group D : 1%

The said ordinance came to be challenged before the High Court by way of various writ petitions as being violative of
Articles 15(4)
, 16(4)
, 162
, 246
, 341(1)
, 228(7)
, 46
, 335
and
of the Constitution, as also the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 notified by the
President, and the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act, 1976
. The contention advanced on behalf of the appellants was that the State legislature would have no competence to make any law in regard to bifurcation of the Presidential List of Scheduled Castes prepared under
Article 341(1)
of the Constitution, and, therefore, the impugned legislation being one solely meant for subdividing or subgrouping the castes enumerated in the Presidential List, the same would suffer from lack of legislative competence. It was also urged that once, the castes are put in the Presidential List, the said castes would become one homogeneous class for all purposes under the Constitution, and, therefore, there could be no further division of the said castes in the Scheduled List by any Act of the State legislature. Some other pleas in support of the appeal were also made. The main controversy involved in the case was the power of the State legislature to divide and subdivide the SC/ST categories for conferring benefit upon those who advanced and may not be entitled for the benefit of reservations. In para 113 of the judgment it has been clearly mentioned that the power of the State Legislature to decide as regards grant of benefit of reservation in jobs or in educational institutions to the backward classes is not in dispute. It is furthermore not in dispute that if such a decision is made the State can also lay down a legislative policy as regards extent of reservation to be made for different members of the backward classes including Scheduled Castes. On the controversy as in issue, it was held that the State legislature cannot take away the benefit on the premise that one or the other group amongst the members of the Scheduled Castes has advanced and, thus, is not entitled to the entire benefit of reservation. We are in agreement with the contention raised by the learned counsel for the applicants that the case is not concerned with a comparison with the forward community to see whether the community as a whole or its members individually have become at par with their forward peers. All that was in issue and debated pertained to that once, the community is accepted to be backward, there cannot be bifurcation or subgrouping of SC/ST list to treat some communities as more backward than the others. We may refer to the observations made by the Honble Supreme Court in that regard contained in paras 31 and 39 of the judgment. The same read, thus:

31.	 Therefore, it is clear that the purpose or the true intendment of this Act is only to first divide the castes in the Presidential List of the Scheduled Castes into 4 groups and then divide 15% of reservation allotted to the Scheduled Castes as a class amongst these 4 groups. Thus it is clear that the Act does not for the first time provide for reservation to the Scheduled Castes but only intends to re-distribute the reservation already made by sub-classifying the Scheduled Castes which is otherwise held to be a class by itself. It is a well settled principle in law that reservation to a backward class is not a constitutional mandate. It is the prerogative of the State concerned if they so desire, with an object of providing opportunity of advancement in the society to certain backward classes which includes the Scheduled Castes to reserve certain seats in educational institutions under
Article 15(4)
and in public services of the State under
Article 16(4).
That part of its constitutional obligation, as stated above, has already been fulfilled by the State. Having done so, it is not open to the State to sub-classify a class already recognised by the Constitution and allot a portion of the already reserved quota amongst the State created sub-class within the List of Scheduled Castes.
39.	Legal constitutional policy adumbrated in a statute must answer the test of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India. Classification whether permissible or not must be judged on the touchstone of the object sought to be achieved. If the object of reservation is to take affirmative action in favour of a class which is socially, educationally and economically backward, the State's jurisdiction while exercising its executive or legislative function is to decide as to what extent reservation should be made for them either in Public Service or for obtaining admission in educational institutions. In our opinion, such a class cannot be sub-divided so as to give more preference to a miniscule proportion of the Scheduled Castes in preference to other members of the same class.

From the statement of law as extracted above, we are once again in agreement with the contention raised by the learned counsel representing the applicant that what was held is that a class cannot be subdivided so as to give more preference to a miniscule proportion in preference to the other members of the same class, and as long as the members of the community are still considered backward, there cannot be a sub-categorisation to give more benefit to some than the others. The judgment relied upon by the learned counsel cannot be interpreted to mean that even if a person is no more backward and answers the creamy layer criteria as may be fixed by the Government, he would still continue to enjoy and reap the benefits of affirmative action.

27.	Independent of the case law relied upon by the counsel representing the applicants, we are of the view that while applying the principle of creamy layer, there cannot be a distinction between SCs and STs on one hand and OBCs on the other. In view of the provisions contained in
Article 14
of the Constitution, the State cannot deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws. There is a prohibition of discrimination against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex and place of birth, as per provisions contained in
Article 15(1).
However, by virtue of provisions contained in
Article 15(4)
the State is not prevented from making any special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes. In view of provisions contained in
Article 15(5)
the State is not prevented from making any special provision, by law, for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, insofar as such special provisions relate to their admission to educational institutions. The power of the State as regards making special provisions for the advancement or for admissions to educational institutions is equally applicable to socially and educationally backward classes of citizens and the SCs and STs. In view of the provisions contained in
Article 16
, there has to be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State, and there cannot be any discrimination based upon grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth and residence or any of them. Further, by virtue of provisions contained in
Article 16(4)
the State is not prevented from making any provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State, may not be adequately represented in the services under it. By virtue of provisions contained in
Article 16(4A)
the State is not prevented from making any provision for reservation in matters of promotion, with consequential seniority to any class or classes of posts in the services under it. It does not appear that the Constitution makes any distinction between the SCs and STs as regards making special provisions for admission or services under the State, except for that insofar as the promotion with consequential seniority is concerned, the same appears to be only applicable to SCs and STs. If the creamy layer principle is applicable to OBC categories, which, we may mention, is admittedly so, why such principle could not be applicable to SCs and STs. The only distinction that comes to our notice is that whereas, SCs and STs are socially, educationally and economically backward from generations, by the very fact that they belong to SCs or STs, they are considered to be socially, educationally and economically backward, whereas other backward classes may have to be identified for making special laws for them. It may be recalled that the concept of OBCs has its roots in the Mandal Commissions report. The President pursuant to a resolution of the Parliament, appointed the second Backward Class Commission on January 1, 1979 under the chairmanship of Shri B. P. Mandal to investigate the conditions of Socially and Economically Backward Classes (SEBCs). The Commission submitted its report in 1980, identifying number of castes as SEBCs. It concluded that excluding SCs and STs, Other Backward Classes (OBCs) constitute nearly 52% of the Indian population. On the basis of the report of the Commission, two office memoranda came to be issued by the Government which have been adverted to hereinbefore. The benefit of the recommendations made by the Commission as per memorandum dated 13.8.1990 was to be extended to socially and educationally backward classes as opined by the Commission. As per the second memorandum dated 25.9.1991, the benefit was to be provided to economically backward sections of people not covered by any of the existing schemes of reservation. It appears to us that whereas SCs and STs are per se considered socially, educationally and economically backward, others in the same situation have been identified on an extensive exercise carried out in that regard. Be it, therefore, SCs, STs or OBCs, all are socially, educationally and economically backward, and if that be so, if the creamy layer test is to apply to OBCs, it has to apply to SCs and STs as well.

28.	The justification for permitting reservation in favour of SCs and STs is that these communities are considered to be backward. The creamy layer principle is evolved for the simple reason that an erstwhile person belonging to backward class is no more backward. Once, he may rub shoulders with any general category candidate, and, in a given case, may be even better placed than him, he would no more be backward socially, economically or educationally. We may illustrate  an SC category candidate, because of the percentage of seats reserved for his category, may be selected and appointed to the Indian Administrative Service (IAS) or the Indian Police Service (IPS). Once, he occupies the elite service in the country, he gets a status which may be far better than that of a general category employee occupying some other post far below to that of IAS or IPS, who, even though may have competed with the SC category candidate and obtained more marks than him, but could not make it to the elite service. Such an SC category candidate may have in due course four children and all of them may, because of reservation, also come to be selected and appointed to the same service. Can children of such reserved category person be said to be socially, economically and educationally backward! In our considered view, he will have perhaps far better means than his general category counterpart to get his children educated in the best of educational educations in the country. His social status is uplifted and he has, by virtue of the office held by him, a far higher social status than the general category employee may have. Of course, any pay in this country may not be enough, but once a person is in an all India service, he cannot be said to be economically backward. If despite all this, the principle of creamy layer is not to be applied to him, in our view, it would constitute discrimination against general category candidates, which would be constitutionally impermissible in terms of
Article 16
of the Constitution. Once, the tag of backwardness goes, then the differentiation between the SC/ST and general categories only on the basis of caste would be impermissible and against all canons of principle of equality. There has to be exclusion of the creamy layer from the benefits of reservation/affirmative action of the State, as otherwise it would become discriminatory between equals, who cannot be treated unequal only on the basis of caste. The comparison in such a case is a comparison of the individual who is to be given the benefit with a similarly situated person of the forward group. Such person cannot be given the benefit of affirmative action of the State under
Articles 15(4)
, 16(4)
or 16(4A), as such person would not satisfy the test of backwardness. The principle of exclusion of the forwards amongst the backwards, i.e., creamy layer, it appears, has been culled out by the Honble Supreme Court for the reasons as we have already mentioned above. The basic premise and the theme behind affirmative action is to permit proportionate equality for the time being to achieve real equality or formal equality, proportionate equality being the means to achieve an end, i.e., formal equality.
To permit benefits of affirmative action to those who may not need State protection would be defeating the goal of formal equality and would amount to reverse discrimination. The justification of an affirmative Station action is existence of backwardness, and if this test of backwardness is not satisfied, there would be no justification for affirmative action and the action would be hit by
Article 14
of the Constitution. Thus, where identification is based on caste, exclusion of creamy layer necessarily comes in to justify a class to satisfy the characteristics of a same class. The Honble Supreme Court in
R. S. Garg v State of Uttar Pradesh
[(2006) 6 SCC 430] has held that affirmative action in essence and spirit involves classification of people as backward class of citizens and those are not backward class of citizens, and that a group of persons although are not as such backward or by passage of time ceased to be so, would come within the purview of the creamy layer doctrine evolved by the Honble Supreme Court. Pertinent observations which may need reproduction contained in para 37, read, thus:

37. Equality clauses contained in
Articles 14
, 15
and
of the Constitution of India may in certain situations have to be considered as the basic structure/features of the Constitution of India. We do not mean to say that all violations of
Article 14
or 16 would be violative of the basic features of the Constitution of India as adumbrated in
Kesvananda Bharati vs. State of Kerala
[(1973) 4 SCC 225 : 1973 Supp. SCR 1]. But, it is trite that while a law is patently arbitrary, such infringement of the equality clause contained in
Article 14
or
Article 16
may be held to be violative of the basic structure of the Constitution.

{See
Waman Rao vs. Union of India
[(1981) 2 SCC 362], Maharao Saheb Shri Bhim Singhji, etc.
vs. Union of India & Ors. [AIR 1981 SC 234] and Minerva Mills Ltd. & Ors. vs. Union of India & Ors [(1980) 3 SCC 625]. A statute professing division amongst citizens, subject to
Articles 15
and
of the Constitution of India must pass the test of strict scrutiny.
Article 15(4)
and
Article 16(4)
profess to bring the socially and educationally backward people to the forefront. Only for the purpose of invoking equality clause, the makers of the Constitution thought of protective discrimination and affirmative action. Such recourse to protective discrimination and affirmative action had been thought of to do away with social disparities. So long as social disparities among groups of people are patent and one class of citizens in spite of best efforts cannot effectively avail equality of opportunity due to social and economic handicaps, the policy of affirmative action must receive the approval of the constitutional courts. For the said purpose, however, the qualifications laid down in the Constitution for the aforementioned purpose must be held to be the sine qua non. Thus, affirmative action in essence and spirit involves classification of people as backward class of citizens and those who are not backward class of citizens. A group of persons although are not as such backward or by passage of time ceased to be so would come within the purview of the creamy layer doctrine evolved by this court. The court by evolving said doctrine intended to lay a law that in terms of our constitutional scheme no group of persons should be held to be more equal than the other group.
In relation to the minorities, a 11-Judge Bench of this Court in
T.M.A. Pai Foundation vs. State of Karnataka
[(2002) 8 SCC 481] categorically held that protection is required to be given to the minority so as to apply the equality clauses to them vis-a-vis the majority.

In
Islamic Academy of Education vs. State of Karnataka
[(2003) 6 SCC 697], it was opined that the minority have more rights than the majority.

To the said extent
Islamic Academy of Education
(supra) was overruled by a 7-Judge Bench of this Court in
P.A. Inamdar vs. State of Maharashtra
[(2005) 6 SCC 537].

29.	We have already referred to the judgment of the Honble Supreme Court in M. Nagaraj. We may still refer to the pertinent discussion on applicability of the principle of creamy layer to SCs and STs. In that regard we may reproduce part of para 120 and paras 122 and 123 of the judgment in M. Nagaraj, thus:

120. In Indra Sawhney this Court has, therefore, accepted caste as a determinant of backwardness and yet it has struck a balance with the principle of secularism which is the basic feature of the Constitution by bringing in the concept of creamy layer.
122. We reiterate that the ceiling-limit of 50%, the concept of creamy layer and the compelling reasons, namely, backwardness, inadequacy of representation and overall administrative efficiency are all constitutional requirements without which the structure of equality of opportunity in
Article 16
would collapse.

123. However, in this case, as stated, the main issue concerns the "extent of reservation". In this regard the concerned State will have to show in each case the existence of the compelling reasons, namely, backwardness, inadequacy of representation and overall administrative efficiency before making provision for reservation. As stated above, the impugned provision is an enabling provision. The State is not bound to make reservation for SC/ST in matter of promotions. However if they wish to exercise their discretion and make such provision, the State has to collect quantifiable data showing backwardness of the class and inadequacy of representation of that class in public employment in addition to compliance of
Article 335.
It is made clear that even if the State has compelling reasons, as stated above, the State will have to see that its reservation provision does not lead to excessiveness so as to breach the ceiling-limit of 50% or obliterate the creamy layer or extend the reservation indefinitely.
[

30.	Before we may part with this aspect of the case, we would like to mention that it is not understandable as to why the State is insisting upon that the creamy layer principle should not be applicable to SCs and STs. Is it not the wish of the Parliament expressed through the relevant provisions of the Constitution
referred to above
that the benefit of reservation should reach to all those who, because of their caste or tribe, are backward? In other words, is it the intention of the Legislature that the benefit of reservation should reach to only those who were erstwhile backwards? We may not have any exact or approximate data before us to state that in a percentage of 15% and 7.5% reservation with regard to SCs and STs respectively, what is the percentage of such categories who have already received the benefit of reservation, but it is the common view of all that for the reason that creamy layer principle has not been made applicable to SCs and STs, the advantage of reservation has remained confined to a handful of families. If the creamy layer principle is not made applicable to SCs and STs, it is bound to happen like that. Surely, those who have already obtained the benefit of reservation and have come to occupy higher positions, they have become socially, economically and educationally advanced. They have the facilities, resources and finances to take care of themselves and their children. Surely, children of such people with all the facilities, which the others who have not received the benefit of reservation, are far better and that being so, it is they who would normally come higher in merit than their counter parts of reserved category of SCs and STs. It is in that context that we are observing that the benefit of reservation would remain confined to only a handful of people of the reserved category, whereas others would be deprived of the same. The benefit of reservation to uplift the backward class of SCs and STs has to reach all. A time has to come when every one who deserves to be uplifted is given a chance for the same, failing which the object that all backward class categories have to be uplifted and brought into the main stream with unreserved category candidates would remain a dream. We may recall that the reservation at the advent of the Constitution was limited for some years, and is continuing unabated with manifold added dimensions, even though sixty years have gone by since the Constitution came into being, and there is no hope that reservations, which were, as mentioned above, to be for a limited time, would ever come to a end. In view of the State, adequate reservation for SCs and STs is 15% and 7.5% respectively. It was so to start with and continues to be the same till date. Surely and definitely, if the creamy layer principle may have been applied, the percentage of backwardness per se presumed to be with SCs and STs would have come down and there would have been some ray of hope that at one time, such percentage would come down and may even come to an end. Further, the insistence of the State not to apply creamy layer principle to SCs and STs may work injustice inter se SCs and STs. In fact and reality, those to whom the benefit of reservation has not reached, are made to compete with those who have received it and have become at par or even better than the unreserved category persons.

31.	The last plea as regards non-applicability of the principle of creamy layer to SCs and STs of the learned ASG is based upon DOP&T circular/letter dated 29.3.2007 who contends that creamy layer concept would not be applicable to SCs and STs. In the letter aforesaid after making mention of the four Amendments brought about in the Constitution, i.e., 77th, 81st, 82nd and 85th Amendments, and after reproducing some portions of the judgment of the Supreme Court in M. Nagarajs case, it is mentioned that the law officers of the Government had advised that the observations made in M. Nagarajs case regarding creamy layer amongst SCs and STs would be obiter dicta. All that we may comment upon is that the advice tendered to DOP&T is against the dictum of the Honble Supreme Court in M. Nagaraj.

32.	Insofar as, complying with the conditions precedent for reservation in promotions and accelerated seniority are concerned, it may be recalled that the case of the State is that according to the 2001 Census, there are 16.2% Scheduled Castes and 8.2% Scheduled Tribes and, therefore, reservation in the matter of public employment is proportionate to the population of such categories, and that since the said benchmark has not been achieved, reservation would be continued, and further that the numerical benchmark
laid down by
the Central Government for the purposes of reservation in favour of SCs and STs is 15% and 7.5% respectively, and it is impleaded post-based, which would mean that if representation of SCs in a grade becomes 15%, they are not given any reservation, and, therefore, the Government treats 15% reservation for SCs as adequate and whenever such adequacy is achieved, no reservation is provided to that class, and that the same is also true as regards STs, and further that there is an inbuilt system to ensure that reservation to SCs and STs is not given when their representation in a service becomes adequate. The data provided is as on 1.1.2006, and admittedly, no exercise has been undertaken after the judgment of the Honble Supreme Court in M. Nagaraj. The judgment in Nagarajs case was delivered on 19.10.2006. From the affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents, contents whereof have been
referred to above
, it is apparent that adequate representation of SCs and STs has been worked out on the basis of proportionate representation of their population. The provisions of
Article 16(4)
of the Constitution would not prevent the State from making any provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens, which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under it. It is adequacy of the representation of backward classes of citizens which has to be assessed, and not proportionate representation as per their population. Once again, in the provisions contained in
Article 16(4A)
, the State is not prevented from making any provision for reservation in matters of promotion, with consequential seniority, to any class or classes of posts in the services under it in favour of SCs and STs, which, in the opinion of the State, are not adequately represented. It is once again, adequacy of representation which is to be worked out and not proportionate representation. In Indra Sawhneys case, Honble Justice Jeevan Reddy observed that clause (4) of
Article 16
speaks of adequate representation and not proportionate representation, and that adequate representation cannot be read as proportionate representation. We may refer to para 807 of the judgment in Indra Sawhneys case, which reads as follows:

807.	 We must, however, point out that clause (4) speaks of adequate representation and not proportionate representation. Adequate representation cannot be read as proportionate representation. Principle of proportionate representation is accepted only in
Articles 330
and
of the Constitution and that too for a limited period. These articles speak of reservation of seats in Lok Sabha and the State legislatures in favour of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes proportionate to their population, but they are only temporary and special provisions. It is therefore not possible to accept the theory of proportionate representation though the proportion of population of backward classes to the total population would certainly be relevant.

Honble Justice Sawant also observed that not only
Article 16(4)
but for that matter,
Article 335
also does not speak of giving proportionate representation to the backward classes and SCs/STs. Para 505 of the judgment reads as follows:

505.	 It is necessary in this connection, to point out that not only
Article 16(4)
but for that matter,
Article 335
also does not speak of giving proportional representation to the backward classes and SCs/STs respectively.
Article 16(4)
, as repeatedly pointed out earlier, in terms, speaks of adequate representation to the backward classes, while
Article 335
speaks of the claims of the members of the SCs/STs. However, it cannot be disputed that whether it is the appointments of SCsSTs or other backward classes, both are to be made consistently with the maintenance of the efficiency in administration.

In
Anil Chandra
(supra) as well, it has been observed that adequate representation does not mean proportional representation. In view of the scheme of the constitutional provisions, the theory propounded by the State with regard to proportionate representation is wholly unsustainable and has to be repelled. No exercise as ordained by the Honble Supreme Court in M. Nagarajs case as regards conditions precedent for applicability of reservation in promotions and accelerated seniority has been done. Reservation of seats for SCs and STs in the House of the People is governed by
Article 330
of the Constitution. The total number of seats reserved in any State or Union territory for SCs and STs shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats allotted to that State of Union Territory in the House of the People as the population of SCs and STs in that State or Union territory or part thereof, as the case may be, in respect of which seats are so reserved, bears to the total population of the State or Union territory. In view of the provisions contained in
Article 243D(1)
seats shall be reserved for the SCs and STs in every Panchayat and the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in that Panchayat as the population of the SCs and STs in that Panchayat area. As per provisions contained in
Article 243T
reservation of seats for SCs and STs in every municipality and the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in that municipality as the population of the SCs and STs in that municipal area bears to the total population of that area. What is true as regards adequacy of seats in the House of the People, i.e., the Lok Sabha, Panchayats and municipalities, is not true as regards the extent of reservation in appointments or promotion, as the case may be. The State appears to have laboured under a wrong impression in making the extent of reservation proportionate to the population of the SCs and STs.

33.	The requirement of taking appropriate steps as regards pre-conditions spelled out in the judgment of the Apex Court in M. Nagarajs case, and the consequences of not doing so, have since already been commented upon in the judicial precedents already
referred to above
. We need not give the facts of such cases as the same have already been given in sufficient detail hereinbefore. We may only make a mention of observations made in that context in the said judgments.

The Honble Supreme Court while dealing with the concept of creamy layer as spelled out in
Nair Service Society
(supra) held that it has categorically laid down that determination of creamy layer is part of the constitutional scheme.

In
Anil Chandra
(supra) it has been held that it was the constitutional obligation of the State, at the time of providing reservation in the matter of promotions, to identify the class or classes of posts in the service for which reservation is required, however, neither any effort has been made to identify the class or classes of posts for which reservation is to be provided in promotion nor any exercise has been done to quantify the extent of reservation. The result of not doing so has already been adverted to above.
A Division Bench of the High Court of Himachal Pradesh in H. P. Samanya Varg Karamchari Kalyan Mahasangh (supra) has held that from the law laid down by the Apex Court it is clear that the Court has upheld the constitutional amendments but has laid down that this would not obliterate the constitutional requirements of ceiling of 50%, the concept of creamy layer, the sub-classification between OBCs on the one hand and the SCs and STs on the other hand, and the concept of post-based roster with inbuilt concept of replacements. It has also been held that it has been clearly laid down that the State is not bound to make reservations for SCs and STs, however, if it chooses to exercise the powers vested in it to make such reservations, the State must collect quantifiable data showing backwardness of the class and inadequacy of representation of that class in public employment, and in addition thereto
article 335
relating to efficiency must be also complied with. It was subject to these guidelines that the constitutional validity of the amendments was upheld.
The Punjab & Haryana High Court in
Prithpal Singh
(supra) after reproducing paras 120, 121 and 122 of the judgment of the Honble Supreme Court in M. Nagarajs case, observed as follows:

From the above, it is crystal clear that the 85th Constitutional Amendment and Section 16(4A) per se do not provide the benefit of consequential seniority unless the concerned State on the basis of the relevant material/data makes a provision for consequential seniority. After the delivery of the aforesaid judgment or even the 85th Constitutional amendment the State of Punjab has not made any provision for consequential seniority in the State of Punjab. The Reservation Act of 2006 does not contain any such provision.
In absence of there being any provision the principle of catch-up rule
laid down by
the Honble Apex Court in case of Ajit Singh Januja shall apply

For lack of taking steps which are pre requisite, it was held that inter se seniority between the general category and reserved category candidates would continue to be determined in view of Ajit Singh Janujas case.

A Division Bench of the Rajasthan High Court in
State of Rajasthan v Bajrang Lal Sharma
(supra), after discussing the entire case law on the subject, in a lengthy judgment has concluded in para 112 as follows:

112.	 The above discussion makes it clear that clause (4A) of
Article 16
was only an enabling provision and as held by the Honble Apex Court in M. Nagarajs case (supra), that the State is not bound to make reservation for the SCs and the STs in the matters of promotion. However, if they wish to exercise their discretion and make such provision, the State has to collect quantifiable data showing backwardness of the class and inadequacy of representation of that class in public employment in addition to compliance with Article 335. Admittedly, the said exercise has not been done by the State Government either before amending the various Service Rules including the RAS Rules vide Notification dated 28.12.2002 or before issuing Notification dated 25.4.2008.

34.	From the discussion made above, we hold that the creamy layer principle is applicable to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes as well. It is not confined only to OBC category. We also hold that provisions as regards reservation are enabling. Clause (4A) of
Article 16
is also enabling provision. The State, it may be recalled, as per the language of the relevant provisions of the Constitution itself, is not bound to make reservation for SCs and STs in matters of promotion, but if it may do so, it has to collect quantifiable data showing the backwardness and inadequacy of representation of that class in public employment. It has also to comply with the provisions contained in
Article 335
which in terms states that the claims of members of SCs and STs shall be taken into consideration, consistently with the maintenance of efficiency of administration, in the making of appointments to services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or a State. While thus making reservations in promotions, the requirement of efficiency of administration has also to be necessarily considered.

35.	In all fairness to the learned ASG, we may mention that it was urged by him that this Court may not interfere at this stage as in the very nature of things, the exercise as ordained by the Honble Supreme Court in M. Nagarajs case has to take time, and that the State for the time being has worked out reservation in promotion proportionate to the population of the SCs and STs in services, and further that something has been done in the matter, whereas other things required can be done later. There is no merit in the contention raised by the learned ASG as noted above. The judgment in M. Nagarajs case in express terms lays down that the exercise has to be done before the enabling powers can be exercised. Pertinent observations in that behalf as contained in para 123 of the judgment in M. Nagaraj have already been reproduced hereinbefore.

36.	While giving the facts of the case, we have adverted to the case set up by the applicants that for the period prior to 17.6.1995 there was no source of power providing for reservation in promotion, as it was held by the Honble Supreme Court in
Indra Sawhney
(supra) that reservation in promotion cannot be sourced to
Article 16(4)
of the Constitution. It is the case of the applicants that all promotions made prior to the Amendment ought to have been treated as ad hoc and as a consequence there can be no conferment of consequential seniority. The position in law apart, as mentioned above, it is further the case of the applicants that insofar as at least the Railways is concerned, the rules did not permit conferment of consequential seniority. In fact, it was specifically provided that the seniority of roster point promotees would be governed by their panel positions. The history of reservation and the manner of its working in the Indian Railways has been given in detail in the judgment of the Honble Supreme Court in Virpal Singh Chauhans case (supra). The mention in the judgment, to start with, is of Indian Railway Establishment Manual, Vol.I, containing instructions regulating inter alia seniority of non-gazetted railway servants, as contained in Chapter III. Para 306 provides that Candidates selected for appointment at an earlier selection shall be senior to those selected later irrespective of the dates of posting except in the case covered by paragraph 305. Para 309 reads as follows:

Seniority on Promotion.  Paragraph 306 above applies equally to seniority in promotion vacancies in one and the same category due allowance being made for delay, if any, in joining the new posts in the exigencies of service.

Subject to paragraphs 302 to 306, when the dates of appointment to the grade are the same, the date of entry into the grade next below it, shall determine seniority, as per para 314. Para 319 deals with seniority on promotion to non-selection posts, as per which promotion to non-selection posts shall be on the basis of seniority-cum-suitability, suitability being judged by the authority competent to fill the post, by oral and/or written test of a departmental examination or a trade test of by scrutiny of record of service as considered necessary. It is also stated therein that the railway servant, once promoted in his turn after being found suitable against a vacancy, which is non-fortuitous, should be considered as senior in that grade to all others who are subsequently promoted after being found suitable. The letter of Railway Board dated 13.8.1959 is of a general nature, which says that as a general rule the seniormost candidate should be promoted to a higher non-selection post, subject to his suitability. Once promoted against a vacancy which is non-fortuitous, he should be considered as senior in the grade to all others who are subsequently promoted. Boards letter dated 31.8.1982 deals with the subject Reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in promotion in Group D and C (Class IV and III) on the basis of seniority-cum-suitability. Para 4 of the letter aforesaid reads as follows:

"Against the above background, the matter has been reviewed by the Board. It has been decided that positing of Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe candidates on promotions in non-selection posts should also be done as per the reserved points on the roster subject, however, to the condition that seniority of the Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe candidates in comparison to other candidates will continue to be governed by the panel position in the case of categories where training is not provided and in accordance with the merit position in the examination where training is provided."

Mention is also of Railway Board letter dated 19.1.1972 dealing with promotion to selection posts, which would show that even in cases of promotions made on the basis of merit, the same principle applies. Railway Board letter dated 20.10.1960 says that Seniority of SC/ST employees will be determined under the normal rules. The reservation roster is considered only a machinery to ensure the prescribed percentage of reservation for SC/ST employees and should not be related to the question of seniority and confirmation. If any of the SC/ST employee is confirmed in the post by virtue of roster, such confirmation will not give them any benefit in respect of seniority. Chapter XII dealing with confirmation and seniority refers to letter dated 11.2.1972, which reads as follows:

"Sub: Reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Application of roster both at the time of initial recruitment and confirmation.

Reference Board's letter No. E (SCT) 62 CM 15/7 Dated 20th April 1963 which provides that the reservation roster is to be applied only at the time of initial recruitment and that confirmation should be made in the order of seniority which in the case of non-trained categories is determined on the basis of the position in the panel supplied by the Railway Service Commission and in the case of trainee categories on the basis of the merit position in the examination.

2. The Board after careful consideration have decided that in the post filled by direct recruitment on or after the date of issue of this letter, reservation may be made for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes both at the time of initial appointment on temporary basis as well as at the time of confirmation. In posts filled by promotion, however, no reservation admissible at the stage of confirmation of promotees and the existing procedure of confirming employees in order of their panel position may continue.

3. The seniority of candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes vis-`-vis other will continue to be determined as at present. i. e., according to the panel position in the case of categories where training is not provided and in accordance with the merit position in the examination where training is provided.

Reference is then to letter dated 31.8.1982 relevant portion whereof has already been extracted hereinbefore. In view of the case law and the instructions, it was held that the reservation roster would only ensure the prescribed percentage of reservation but would not affect seniority, and that whereas reserved candidates would be entitled to accelerated promotions, they would not be entitled to consequential seniority, and further that the seniority between the general and reserved candidates in promoted category would continue to be the same as was at the time of the initial appointment provided both belong to the same grade. It is the plea of the applicants that there may be provision for reservation in promotion but there was no provision for conferment of consequential seniority. In Indra Sawhneys case, specifically it was held that
Article 16(4)
cannot be the source of making reservation in promotions. The judgment in Virpal Singh Chauhans case came to be delivered on 10.10.1995 and the same was made prospective from 10.2.1995, i.e., the date of judgment in R. K. Sabharwals case. The issue of prospectivity of Virpal Singh Chauhan and R. K. Sabharwal was considered by a Constitutional Bench in Ajit Singh Januja (supra) wherein it was held that promotions already made would be deemed to be ad hoc and there cannot be conferment of seniority till there was vacancy in regular course. The issue as raised by the applicants, it is the case of the applicants, that for the period prior to 10.2.1995 the issue raised by them would be covered by the judgment of the Honble Supreme Court in the case of Ajit Singh Januja (supra) and for the period between 10.2.1995 and 17.6.1995 the principle of regaining seniority has been accepted by the railways itself and, therefore, for the period prior to 17.6.1995 no seniority can be conferred. For the period after 10.2.1995, it is the case of the applicants, the railways has itself accepted vide circular dated 25.9.1997 that the seniority lists which are prepared as per circulars dated 19.1.1972 and 31.8.1982 would be valid for promotions after 10.2.1995. For the period 17.6.1995 till 8.3.2002, it is the case of the applicants that the post-77th Amendment as well as the 85th Amendment, the power subsisted for conferment of accelerated seniority but the said power has been exercised by the railways for the first time on 8.3.2002. The said circular is sought to be made retrospective from 17.6.1995, which would be unsustainable. In the Indian Railways, it is the case of the applicants, there was no provision for accelerated seniority and, therefore, the retrospective power would not be available to the Railways.

37.	We have applied our mind to the pleadings and the contentions raised by the learned counsel representing the applicants on the issues as mentioned above, but are of the view that once, in brevity, it is the case of the applicants that when no compliance of pre-conditions as spelled out in M. Nagarajs case has been done, reservation in promotion with accelerated seniority shall have to be worked in the way and manner as per the law settled earlier on the issue. If that be so, we need not have to labour on the issues raised by the applicants, as surely, if the position is already settled, the only relevant discussion and adjudication in this case can be and should be confined to non-observance of the pre-conditions for making accelerated promotions as valid. We have already held above that the railways have not worked out or even applied their mind to the pre-conditions as mentioned above before giving effect to the provisions of
Article 16(4A)
, and for that reason, circular dated 29.2.2008 vide which the seniority of SC/ST railway servants promoted by virtue of rule of reservation/roster has to be regulated in terms of instructions contained in Boards letter dated 8.3.2002 and 13.1.2005, has to be quashed. There is a specific prayer to quash instructions dated 8.3.2002 and 13.1.2005 as well, but there would be no need to do so as the same have been discussed in the case of railways itself in the matter of
Virpal Singh Chauhan
(supra), and commented upon. While setting aside instructions dated 29.2.2008, our directions would be to not to give accelerated seniority to Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe category employees till such time pre-conditions on which alone
Article 16(4A)
of the Constitution is to operate, are complied with. No directions in this case can be given as regards seniority of the applicants vis-`-vis those who were appointed with them and have stolen a march over them because of reservation and have obtained accelerated seniority. No such specific prayer has been made either. However, it would be open for the parties to this lis or any one else to seek determination of their proper seniority for which legal proceedings shall have to be resorted to. It would be difficult to order across the board that all those who have obtained the benefit of reservation and have also been accorded accelerated seniority be put below general category candidates who may have been senior to the reserved category employees and became below in seniority on the promoted posts because of conferment of accelerated seniority to the reserved category employees. Surely, for seeking seniority over and above Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe employees, number of things shall have to be gone into, as for instance, as to when was the promotion made and seniority fixed, and whether the cause of general category employees would be within limitation. There can be number of issues that may arise. We have mentioned only one by way of illustration.

38.	Present Original Application is disposed of in the manner fully indicated above. In view of the nature of the controversy involved in the case, costs of the litigation are made easy.

( Meera Chhibber )		( L. K. Joshi ) 	 	 ( V. K. Bali )
Member (J)		 Vice-Chairman (A)		 	Chairman

/as/