Central Administrative Tribunal - Ernakulam

M.B. Vijayakumar vs The Union Of India Represented By on 11 August, 2016

Author:
P. Gopinath

Bench:
P. Gopinath

CENTRAL ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ERNAKULAM BENCH

O.A. No. 365 OF 2013

Thursday, this the 11th day of August, 2016
CORAM:

HON'BLE Mr. JUSTICE N.K. BALAKRISHNAN, JUDICIAL MEMBER
HON'BLE Mrs. P. GOPINATH, ADMINISTRATIVE MEMBER

1. M.B. Vijayakumar,
S/o. Balan Nair (late),
Ammunition Mechanic-II,
Ammunition Workshop,
Naval Armament Depot, Aluva,
Southern Naval Command.
Residing at : Karivelilparambil House,
Thottakkattukara (P.O), Aluva.

2. E. Godfred, S/o E. Bharathan (late),
Ammunition Mechanic-II,
Ammunition Workshop,
Naval Armament Depot, Aluva,
Southern Naval Command.
Residing at : Joys Villa,
Kunjattukara, Aluva - 683 651.

3. M.T. Thomas, S/o. M.P. Thomas,
Ammunition Mechanic-II,
Ammunition Workshop,
Naval Armament Depot, Aluva,
Southern Naval Command.
Residing at : Malite House,
Chalakudy, Pariyaram (P.O),
Thrissur District. - Applicants

(By Advocate Mr. P.V. Mohanan)

Versus
1. The Union of India represented by
Secretary, Ministry of Defence,
New Delhi.
2. The Flag Officer Commanding-in-Chief,
Southern Naval Command, Kochi.

3. N.V. Babu,
Ammunition Mechanic-II,
Ammunition Workshop,
Naval Armament Depot,
P.O . Aluva.

4. V.T. Ayyappankutty,
Ammunition Mechanic-II,
Ammunition Workshop,
Naval Armament Depot,
P.O . Aluva.

5. C.K. Valsalan
Ammunition Mechanic-II,
Ammunition Workshop,
Naval Armament Depot,
P.O . Aluva. - Respondents

(By Advocate Mr. N. Anilkumar, Senior PCGC for R-1&2)
The application having been heard on 20.07.2016, the Tribunal
on 11.8.2016 delivered the following:
ORDER

Per: Justice N.K. Balakrishnan, Judicial Member

Annexure A4 promotion order dated 01.04.2013 is under

challenge in this case, in so far as Respondent No. 3, 4 & 5 are concerned

as they were promoted enbloc as Ammunition Mechanic-I (AM-I) in

reservation quota. The applicants commenced service as Semi-Skilled

labourers. They belong to general category (UR). Respondents 3, 4, and

5 commenced service much later as semi-skilled labourers. They belong
to SC category. The next promotion post is Ammunition Mechanic II

(Skilled); Method of appointment being promotion, subject to passing of

qualifying test.

2. Respondents 3, 4 and 5 and other candidates of SC/ST category

were granted accelerated promotion applying roster point reservation.

Their seniority in the cadre of AM-II were reckoned taking note of their

officiating in that cadre. The applicant and other UR candidates were

promoted on later dates and their seniority was reckoned on the date of

officiation. Thus, respondent No. 3, 4 and 5 and other SC candidates

were granted accelerated seniority as well. The applicants, respondents

3, 4 and 5 and other candidates on passing departmental test were

empanelled for promotion to the cadre of AM-I. Serial No. 1 to 19 in

that panel were treated as UR candidates and were granted promotion as

AM-1 without application of roster point reservation. Respondent No. 3,

4 and 5 were promoted enblock treating them as candidates of reserved

category and thereby excess promotions of candidates belonging to

SC/ST were made when 25 posts were filled. If post-based roster is

applied strictly, then point numbers 7, 15 and 20 have to be filled by

appointing SC category candidates; if 25 posts are filled up, and point

No. 14 must be given to ST candidate taking note of the seniority in the

cadre. Thus, according to the applicant point No. 7 is to be filled by

promoting Shri T.N. Surendran (SC); point No. 14 to be filled up by
Shri P.R. Purushothaman (ST); point No. 15 to be filled up by promoting

Shri E. Ramachandran (SC) and point No. 20 should be filled up by

promoting Shri N.V Babu (SC).

3. Thus the applicants contend that Respondent No. 3, 4 and 5 and

other SC/ST candidates are not entitled to get the accelerated seniority in

view of the law laid down by the Apex Court in R.K. Sabharwal v.

State of Pujab & Ors. b� AIR 1995 SC 1371. According to the applicant

in a post based reservation roster issued in purported implementation of

the judgment in Sabharwal (supra), in a cadre of 27, point Nos. 7, 15,

20, 27 are reserved to be filled up by promoting SC candidates and point

Nos. 14 is reserved to be filled up by promoting ST candidates. Since

point Nos. 1, 2 & 3 are already occupied by employees of previous

recruitment, the rotation has to start from point No. 4; in a post based

reservation roster. Going by the seniority list, (Annexure A-6) the post

of AM-1 must be filled by appointing Shri P.S. Vikraman (SC) at point

No. 1, Shri T.N. Surendran (SC) at point No. 6, Shri P.R. Purushothaman

(ST) at point No. 15, Shri E. Ramachandran (SC) at Sl. No. 11 and Shri

N.V. Babu (SC) at Sl. No. 27. Challenging the appointment evidenced

by Annexure A-4 to the extent of respondents 4 and 5 this application

has been filed.

4. The gist of the contention raised by the respondents is stated as

under:-

As per Office Memorandum dated 10.08.2010, it was clarified

that SC/ST candidates appointed by promotion on their own merit and

seniority and not owing to reservation or relaxation of qualification will

be adjusted against unreserved points of reservation roster irrespective of

the fact whether the reservation was made by selection method or non-

selection method (vide Annexure R-1). Annexure R-1 was issued as

directed by the C.A.T. Madras Bench in O.A No. 900/2005. That

decision was upheld by the High Court of Madras. Thus the respondents

are bound to implement the order of the Government. There were 24

vacancies available in which 3 vacancies were reserved for SC

candidates, 2 vacancies for ST candidates and 19 vacancies for UR. The

senior most 19 individuals in AM-II, who fulfilled the eligibility criteria

for promotion were considered for 19 UR posts. Those 19 individuals

were promoted on their own merits and not going by reservation roster,

irrespective of the fact whether the promotion is made by selection

method or non-selection method. The reserved vacancies of SC category

were filled up from those SC candidates, who have completed the

requisite qualifying service and also passed the departmental qualifying

tests. ST vacancies could not be filled up due to non-availability of
eligible candidates in that category. The respondents contented that the

claim made by the applicant is devoid of merit and they pray for the

dismissal of the Original Application.

5. In MA No. 342/2016, which is actually an application to accept

additional document, the applicant has raised certain additional points

which are to be treated as rejoinder. The total cadre strength in the grade

of AM-1 is admittedly 27; three senior most incumbents in the cadre of

AM-II had already been promoted namely Shri T. Vasudevan Unni (SC)

Shri M.V. Radhakrishnan and Shri N.V. Yacob and they are already in

position. Therefore, 24 vacancies remained unfilled. The post-based

reservation roster was introduced as per O.M dated 02.07.1997 which

was done as directed by the Hon'ble Apex Court in Sabharwal's case

(supra). Instead of strictly adhering to the post-based roster as directed

in Sabharwal's case, the first 19 posts were filled up by promoting the

senior most personnel and the last three vacancies were filled up by

junior most Scheduled Caste candidates. It actually violates the

reservation roster.

6. In the additional reply statement filed by the respondents, it is

stated that the promotion to the post of AM-1 was made on the basis of

availability of post-based reservation roster. In the cadre strength of 27

posts of AM-1, 22 points are earmarked for unreserved, 3 for SC and 2
for ST; out of this 3 individuals had occupied in 2003 UR points;

remaining 19 UR, 3 SC and 2 ST were vacant as on 01.01.2013. Hence,

19 UR points were filled from eligible employees strictly as per their

position in the seniority list. Remaining 3 SC points were filled from the

next senior eligible candidates as per regular roster. Hence, the

promotion made at Annexure A-4 in the post of AM-1 is strictly in

accordance with the existing rules. The principle that SC/ST candidates

appointed by promotion on their own merit and seniority, and not owing

to reservation and relaxation of qualifications, will be adjusted against

UR points of reservation roster is fully complied with. It fully satisfies

the dictum laid down by the Apex Court in Sabharwal's case. Hence, the

respondents prayed for dismissal of the application.

7. The point for consideration is whether Annexure A-4

promotion order is in compliance with the principle laid down in

Sabharwal's case and whether a proper post-based roster has been

prepared by the respondents in tune with the directions contained in

Sabharwal's case followed by the Apex Court in the subsequent

decisions.

8. We have heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and

have also gone through the pleadings and records.

9. Prior to the pronouncement of the judgment by the Apex Court
in Sabharwal's case, vacancy based rosters were prescribed in order to

implement the Government's policy relating to reservation of jobs for

SC/ST and candidates belonging to OBC. But the Apex Court in

Sabharwal's case held that the reservation of jobs for SC/ST/OBC should

apply to posts and not to vacancies. It was further held that the vacancy

based rosters can operate only till such time as the representation of

persons belonging to the reserved categories, in a cadre reaches the

prescribed percentage of reservation. It was held by the Apex Court in

Sabharwal (supra)..

'5. When a percentage of reservation is fixed in respect of a
particular cadre and the roster indicates the reserve points,
it has to be taken that the posts shown at the reserve points
are to be filled from amongst the members of reserve
categories and the candidates belonging to the general
category are not entitled to be considered for the reserve
posts. On the other hand the reserve category candidates
can compete for the non-reserve posts and in the event of
their appointment to the said 356 posts their number cannot
be added and taken into consideration for working out the
percentage of reservation.
Article 16(4)
of the Constitution
of India permits the State Government to make any
provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in
favour of any backward class of citizen which, in the
opinion of the State is not adequately represented in the
Services under the State. It is, therefore, incumbent on the
State Government to reach a con- clusion that the backward
class/classes for which the reservation is made is not
adequately represented in the State Services. '

It was further held that:

'..........When the State Government after doing the
necessary exercise makes the reservation and provides
the extent of percentage of posts to be reserved for the
said backward class then the percentage has to be
followed strictly. The prescribed percentage cannot be
varied or changed simply because some of the members
of the backward class have already been
appointed/promoted against the general
seats. .....................'
It was also held that:

'the fact that considerable number of members of a
backward class have been appointed/promoted
against general seats in the State Services may be a
relevant factor for the State Government to review
the question of continuing reservation for the said
class but so long as the instructions/ Rules
providing certain percentage of reservations for the
backward classes are operative the same have to be
followed.' It was further held that 'despite any
number of appointment/promotees belonging to the
backward classes against the general category posts
the given percentage has to be provided in
addition...........' We, therefore, see no force in the
first contention raised by the learned counsel and
reject the same.

10. In purported implementation of the judgment in Sabharwal,

Annexure A7, the post based roster instead of vacancy based roster was

issued by DoPT O.M No. 36012/12/2/96/Estt. dated 02.07.1997.

Specific reference has been made in this O.M about the judgment

rendered by the Constitution Bench in Sabharwal's case as to how the

roster has been prepared. The fact that persons belonging to the reserved

categories who are appointed on the basis of merit - and not on account

of reservation - are not to be counted towards the quota meant for

reservation was also noted in Annexure A-7. It was done with a view to

bringing the policy of reservation in line with the law laid down by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court. It was decided that in the existing 200 points,

40 points and 120 points vacancy based rosters are ordered to be

replaced by post based rosters. All Ministries and Authorities were

directed to prepare the respective rosters based on the principle

elaborated in the explanatory note given in that O.M. It was done in

terms of the directions issued by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in

Sabharwal. Paragraph 4 of the Annexure A-7 reads:

'The principle for preparing the rosters elaborated upon
in the Explanatory Notes are briefly recapitulated
below:

(a) since reservation for OBC does not apply in
promotions, there shall be separate rosters for direct
recruitment and for promotions;

(b) The number of points in the roster shall be equal to
the number of posts in the cadre. In case there is any
increase or decrease in the cadre strength in future, the
rosters shall be expanded/contracted correspondingly.

(c) Cadre, for the purpose of a roster, shall mean a
particular grade and shall comprise the number of posts
to be filled by a particular mode of recruitment in terms
of the applicable recruitment rules. Thus, in a cadre of,
say, 200 posts, where the recruitment rules prescribe a
ratio of 50:50 for direct recruitment and promotion, two
rosters - one for direct recruitment and one for
promotion (when reservation in promotion applies) -

each comprising 100 points shall be drawn up on the
lines of the respective model rosters.'

In para 5 it is stated thus:

'At the stage of initial operation of a roster, it will be
necessary to adjust the existing appointments in the
roster. This will also help in identifying the
excesses/shortages, if any, in the respective categories in
the cadre. This may be done starting from the earliest
appointment and making an appropriate remark -
'utilised by SC/ST/OBC/Gen.', as the case may be,
against each point in the rosters as explained in the
explanatory notes appended to the model rosters. In
making these adjustments, appointments of candidates
belonging to SCs/STs/OBCs which were made on merit
(and not due to reservation) are not to be counted
towards reservation so far as direct recruitment is
concerned. In other words, they are to be treated as
general category appointments.

5. While cadre is generally to be construed as the
number of posts in a particular grade, for the purpose of
preparation of roster, it shall comprise posts required to
be filled by a particular mode of recruitment in terms of
the applicable recruitment rules. To illustrate, in a
cadre comprising 200 posts, where the recruitment rules
prescribe a ratio of 50:50 for direct recruitment and
promotions, the roster for direct recruitment shall have
100 points and that for promotion shall have 100 points

- thus making a total of 200.

10. The roster is to be operated on the principle of
replacement and not as a 'running account' as hitherto.

In other words, the points at which reservation for
different categories applies are fixed as per the roster
and vacancies caused by retirement, etc., of persons
occupying those points shall be filled by appointment of
persons of the respective categories.'

It was further explained by Annexure A-9 O.M dated

11.07.2002 that:

'...........While it is clear from the O.M dated 02.07.1997 that
the SC/ST/OBC candidates appointed by direct recruitment
on their own merit and not owing to reservation will be
adjusted against unreserved points of the reservation roster,
doubts have been raised about SC/ST candidates promoted
on their own merit. It is hereby clarified that:

(i) The SC/ST candidates appointed by promotion on their
own merit and not owing to reservation or relaxation of
qualifications will not be adjusted against the reserved
points of the reservation roster. They will be adjusted
against unreserved points......'

11. As per O.M dated 31.01.2005, it was clarified that O.M dated
11.07.2002 (Annexure A9) takes effect only from the date of its issue;

that is; from 11.07.2002 but however in cases where SC/ST candidates

were promoted on their own merit before 11.07.2002 and were adjusted

against unreserved points, that need not be reopened.

12. According to the respondents, the post of AM-1 was made on

availability of the post based roster points. It is not disputed that the

cadre strength is 27. It is also not disputed that out of this three

individuals had already been in position and so these roster points would

start from No. 4. According to the respondents, there should be 19 UR

points, 3 SC points and 2 ST points, which were vacant as on

01.04.2013. They assert that since 19 UR points were filled from the

eligible employees under UR and as they were fitted in their position in

the seniority list, and since the remaining three SC points were filled

from the next senior eligible SC candidates as per regular roster,

Annexure A4 order is perfectly correct. But the gravamen the of the

contention raised by the applicants is that 3 SC candidates were given

appointment en bloc without following the post-based roster points as

directed in Sabharwal (supra). Though it can be contended that the

percentage of reservation would remain satisfied by appointing 19

persons under UR, 3 under SC that is not what was required to be done

as per Sabharwal. There is no dispute regarding the fact that the SC/ST
candidates appointed by promotion on their own merit and seniority and

not owing to reservation and relaxation of qualifications will be adjusted

against UR points of reservation roster. But the question is how the

roster is to be prepared following the directions contained in Sabharwal.

A model roster was actually appended to the O.M issued by the DoPT.

But according to the applicants, it was not strictly followed by the

respondents while issuing Annexure A-4 order. It is not the total number

of UR or SC or ST that becomes relevant but the actual points where

those persons were fitted or given slots.

13. Annexure A3 is the list as per which it can be seen that the first

three persons were already in position from the date of preparation of

Annexure A4. Therefore, the list is to start from point No.4. Annexure

A1 is the model roster for promotion where the cadre has large number

of posts. It is the admitted case that in AM-II, total number of posts is

27. If so, the points Nos. 1, 14, 21 and 27 are to be occupied by SC

whereas point Nos. 15 is to be occupied by ST.

14.
In
Union of India v. Virpal Singh Chauhan
(1995) 6 SCC 684

which followed R.K. Sabharwal and Ajit Singh Januja and Others v.

State of Punjab and Others (1996) 2 SCC 715, it was made clear that

the candidates belonging to reserved category but selected/promoted on

their own merit (and not on virtue of rule of reservation) shall not be
counted as reserved category candidates. It was also held that the

expression 'appointment' in the absence of any indication to the contrary

includes appointment by promotion. There is no dispute regarding the

fact that at the stage of initial operation of a roster it is necessary to

adjust the existing appointments in the roster which will help in

identifying the excesses/shortages in the respective category in the cadre.

It was stated that it has to be done starting from the earliest appointment

and making an appropriate remark, utilised by 'SC/ST/OBC/Gen.' as the

case each may be in the rosters as explained in the explanatory notes

appended to the model rosters.

15. The Official Memorandum referred to earlier also makes it

pellucid that while making such adjustment, appointment of candidates

belonging to SCs/STs/OBCs which were made on merit shall not to be

counted towards reservation so far as direct recruitment is concerned.

16. Subsequent to the decision of the Madras High Court in
Union

of India v. S. Kalgugasalamoorthy
dated 31.01.2005 it was clarified that

SC/ST candidates appointed by promotion on their own merit and

seniority and not owing to reservation or relaxation of qualifications will

be adjusted against unreserved points of reservation roster, irrespective

of the fact that whether the reservation is made by selection method or

non-selection method.
It was also made clear that the directions given in
Sabharwal (supra) applies not only to direct appointments but also to

promotions including the promotions on the basis of seniority-cum-merit

(non-selection method). The principle of not counting SC/ST candidates

promoted/appointed on their own merit against reserved vacancies

became applicable to all promotions including the promotion on the basis

of seniority-cum-merit (non-selection method).

17. The case for the respondents is that the SC/ST candidates were

selected for promotion to the post, based on lesser benchmark on the

relaxed standard and lesser period of qualifying service bringing them in

zone of consideration because of the reason of their being SC/ST

category. Only in such cases they will be deemed as promoted against

reserved vacancies. Here, that question did not arise at all. It was only a

case of appointment by promotion and therefore, the comparative

assessment based on merit had no role to play in this case. So far as the

actual position in this case is concerned, the total strength in the cadre of

Ammunition Mechanic Grade AM-1 is admittedly 27. It is also not in

dispute that the senior most incumbents had already been promoted

namely Shri Vasudevan Unni, Shri M.V Radhakrishnan and Shri N.V

Yacob and they were already in position. Therefore, only 24 vacancies

remained unfilled. The computation, therefore, should start from the

fourth point. There can also be no doubt, that as directed by the
Constitution Bench in Sabharwal a post based reservation roster is to be

maintained. Based on the model reservation roster it must also be noted

that point No. 7, 15 20 and 27 are reserved to be filled up by promoting

reserved SC candidates and point No. 14 is reserved to be filled up by

promoting the ST candidate.

18. As per the draft seniority list (Annexure A6) it can be seen that

Shri V.S. Vikraman, who is shown as No.1, as per the roster should

occupy the fourth point. Though he is a SC candidate, he comes under

the UR and so it should not be counted towards SC quota.

19. The 2nd person in the seniority should occupy the 5 th place.

There is no dispute regarding that fact. It is occupied by Shri N.M Philip.

Shri P.K. Vijayan, who is the 3rd man in Annexure A-6 (who is to occupy

the 6th point) is a ST candidate. Since 6 th point is not one reserved for

ST, Shri P.K. Vijayan should be reckoned as coming under UR

category. The 7th point is reserved for SC candidate. The person, who is

in that position is Shri I.V. Sasidharan. Since he is not a SC candidate,

the senior most SC candidate (Shri T.N. Surendran), who is otherwise

occupying the 9th place should occupy the 7th point. Therefore, Shri I.V

Sasidharan, Shri P.R Sanadhanan and Shri K.S Haridas who are to

occupy the points 8, 9 and 10 would come under UR category though

among them, 9 and 10 are OBC candidates.

20. There is no reservation for OBC in the matter of promotion.

Shri V. Gopalakrishnan who is just below is to be put in the roster point

to occupy point No. 11. Shri K.K. Sasidharan, Shri P.C.

Madhusoodhanan Sl. Nos. 9 and 10 are to occupy roster points 12 and

13. Then comes the 14th roster point which is reserved for ST

candidates. The senior most ST candidate (Shri Purushothaman who is

at Sl. No. 15) is to occupy point No. 14. Then the 15 th roster point is to

be reserved for SC. Therefore, the 15th roster point which is to be

occupied by the SC candidate was to be filled up by promoting Shri E.

Ramachandran. But it is stated that he subsequently retired on

superannuation.

14. Annexure A-4, the promotion order which was directed to take

effect from 01.04.2013 would show that Shri N.V. Babu, Shri V.T.

Ayyappankutty and Shri C.K. Valsalan who are SC candidates, are en

bloc given appointment at points 20, 21 and 22 without putting them in

the respective slot as per the nodal roster issued by the DoPT pursuant to

the direction issued by Hon'ble Supreme Court in Sabharwal (supra). As

per Annexure A6 seniority list Shri N.V. Babu, is at Sl. No. 27. He is to

be filled at slot No. 20 as per the post-based roster. Sl. Nos. 19, 20, 21,

22 and 23 are to be placed at roster points 21 to 25. If so, Shri E.

Godfred, the 2nd applicant who is at Sl. No. 24 is to be given the slot -
roster point No. 26. Shri Ayyappankutty, is shown at Sl. No. 30 and

Shri C.K. Valsalan is at Sl. No. 32. They are SC candidates. Shri

Ayyappankutty has to occupy the 27th roster point meant for SC. The

contention raised by the respondents that since 19 UR points were filled

up from eligible employees as per their position in the seniority list and

the remaining 3 SC points were filled from the next senior most SC

candidates cannot hold good since the roster should denote with respect

to SC/ST points. It is not intended to have a promotion or appointment,

which cannot be en bloc as done by the respondents as the post based

rosters are to be prepared and maintained by the respondents to effect

appointment in view of the directions contained in Sabharwal and

Annexure A7 O.M issued by the DoPT.

15. Respondents 3 to 5 did not enter appearance and no reply

statement was filed. As per Annexure A7, Shri V.T. Ayyappankutty and

Shri C.K. Valsalan are shown as Sl. No. 21 and 22. They are to be

placed at the respective roster points as per the roster points in tune with

the directions contained in Sabharwal and the subsequent O.M issued by

DoPT. It has to be held that Annexures A3, A4 and A5 to the extend

indicated above are liable to be set aside. Consequently the respondents

are directed to effect promotion strictly in accordance with the directions

contained in R.K Sabharwal. They should prepare a post based roster
strictly in compliance with the directions contained in those judgments

and the Official Memorandum referred to above. It is not mere

percentage of reservation that is to be followed but the reserved

candidates are to be given the respective slots. What have been shown in

Annexure A4 and other documents relied upon by the applicants is that

three SC candidates were enbloc appointed at slots Nos. 20, 21 and 22 as

shown in Annexure A4 but without following the directions to appoint

them at the respective roster points. That has affected the positions to be

occupied by the applicants as well. Hence the respondents are directed to

recast the roster, effecting promotion to the respective slots from among

the candidates who are shown in the seniority list and in the light of

what have been stated above. That seniority is to take effect from

01.04.2013. This exercise should be done within three months from the

date of receipt of a copy of this order.

18. The Original Application is disposed of as above. No order as

to costs.

Dated, this the 16th day of August, 2016)

(Mrs. P. GOPINATH) (N.K. BALAKRISHNAN)
ADMINISTRATIVE MEMBER JUDICIAL MEMBER

ax