Central Administrative Tribunal - Delhi

Shri Suresh Kumar Baliyan vs Union Of India on 3 December, 2012

CENTRAL ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
PRINCIPAL BENCH

OA 4241/2011

ORDER RESERVED ON: 03.10.2012
ORDER PRONOUNCED ON: 03.12.2012

HONBLE MR. G. GEORGE PARACKEN, MEMBER (J)
HONBLE DR. VEENA CHHOTRAY, MEMBER (A)

SC/ST & OBCS Employees Welfare
Association (Regd.),
OPTO Electronics Factory,
Defence Accounts,
(OLF), Raipur, Dehradun-248008 (U.K.)
Through its President

1.	Shri Suresh Kumar Baliyan
Highly skilled Grade-I Trade Examiner (O),
QCO-18, 500877,
OPTO Electronics Factory, Raipur,
Dehradun-248008 (U.K.)
For self and 5 others
Highly skilled Grade-I,
Under the same establishment,
Having same grievance, namely

2.	Shri Roshan Singh, Opt-I/105, 500932,
Trade-Optical Worker

3.	Shri Jai Ram, EPS-14, 501021,
Trade-Fitter (L).

4.	Shri Ramesh Chand, MCP-114, 500323,
Trade-Machinist.

5.	Prem Singh, S-07, 501257,
Trade-Machinist.

6.	Makdoom, QCO-20, 500879
Trade-Examiner (O).				 Applicants.

(By Advocate Shri Devendra Pal Mann)

Versus

1.	Union of India
Through its Secretary,
Ministry of Defence South Block,
New Delhi-110001.

2.	Chairman,
Ordinance Factory Board,
Government of India,
Ministry of Defence,
10-A, S.K. Bose Road,
Kolkata-700001.

3.	General Manager,
OPTO Electronics Factory, Raipur,
Dehradun-248008 (U.K.).			Respondents.

(By Advocate Shri V.S.R. Krishna)

O R D E R

Shri G. George Paracken:

The first applicant in this Original Application is a Society registered under the
Society Registration Act, 1860
working for the welfare of the members of the SC/ST & OBCs OPTO Electronics Factory, Defence Accounts (OLF), Raipur, Dehradun-248008 (U.K.) under the respondents. The other five applicants are Highly Skilled Grade-I workmen working in the said OPTO Electronic Factory. Their grievance is against the impugned Annexure A-1 order No. 11588 dated 20.08.2011 issued by the respondent No. 3 by which their promotions to the post of HS-I w.e.f. 01.01.2006 were cancelled and they were re-designated to HS-II with immediate effect.

2.	The brief facts of the case are that the applicants have been working in OPTO Electronics Factory, Raipur, Dehradun, one of the production unit of Ordnance Factor Board (OFB), Kolkata under the Ministry of Defence (MOD). In Ordnance Factories, prior to introduction of cadre restructuring, the Industrial cadre contained III-grade structure including MCM, HS and skilled. The ratio of Skilled and High Skilled grades was 45:55. Further the 25% of Highly Skilled grade posts were in the grade of Master Craftsman. However, Ministry of Defence, vide their letter No. 14.06.2010 conveyed the Presidents sanction for restructuring of cadre of Artisan Staff in Defence Establishments. As per the said restructuring, the grade structure in the industrial and non-industrial trades and the pay scales of the Defence Artisan Staff stood modified w.e.f. 01.01.2006 as under:



(i)	Skilled	Pay Band PB-1 Grade Pay Rs.1900

(ii)	Highly Skilled Grade-II	Pay Band PB-1 Grade Pay Rs.2400

(iii)	Highly Skilled Grade-I	Pay Band PB-1 Grade Pay Rs.2800

(iv)	Master Craftsman	Pay Band PB-2 Grade Pay Rs.4200


3.	Further, according to the restructured grade;

(i) 	The grade structure in the Industrial as well as Non-Industrial trades is already existing in the ratio of 45:55, the erstwhile Skilled and Highly Skilled, and 25% of Highly Skilled in the grade of Master Craftsman, the following will apply:

45% of the posts may be granted the pay scale of Skilled Worker (Grade Pay of RS.1900 in the Pay Band PB-1);

25% of the remaining 55% may be granted the pay scale of MCM (Grade Pay of Rs.4200 in the pay band PB-2);

* The remaining posts may be divided in a ratio of 50:50 and redesignated as Highly Skilled Worker Grade-II (Grade Pay of Rs.2400 in Pay Bank PB-1) and Highly Skilled Worker Grade-I (Grade Pay of Rs.2800 in Pay Band PB-1).

(2)	The placement of the individuals in the posts resulting from the restructuring shall be made w.e.f. 1.1.2006, in relaxation of the conditions, if any, i.e., trade test etc. as one time measure.

(3)	Highly Skilled Grade-I shall be en-bloc senior to Highly Skilled Grade-II.

4.	As per the above the actual revised ratio/percentage of different grades in the industrial trades arrived as under:



Sl.No.	Grade	Percentage
I	Skilled	45
II	HS-II	20.625
III	HS-I	20.625
IV	MCM	13.75


5.	Further, according to the aforesaid letter of the Ministry of Defence dated 14.06.2010,
(i)	The post of Master Craftsman shall be part of the hierarchy and the placement of Highly Skilled Grade-I in the grade of Master Craftsman will be treated as promotion.

(ii)	In the case of Defence Establishments where there is no category of Skilled Workers and direct recruitment is made 100% at the level of Highly Skilled, the posts of Master Craftsman existing as on 1.1.2006 will be placed in PB-2 + GP-4200 and the remaining posts of Highly Skilled Workers may be bifurcated in HS-I and HS-II in the ratio of 50:50.

(iii)	In view of the above re-structuring, the artisan staff may be allowed to give revised option for pay fixation w.e.f. 1.1.2006 within 3 months from the date of issue of orders in this regard.

(iv)	The existing recruitment rules for the Tradesman may be amended and RRs for the post of MCM may be framed accordingly.

6.	In terms of the aforesaid letter, the respondents have further divided the existing 55% posts of HS into following:-

(a)	25% of the above said 55% placed in MCM on 1.1.2006;

(b)	Remaining 75% of the 55% posts divided in a ratio of 50:50 as HS-I and HS-II respectively on 1.1.2006.

7.	While dividing the post as stated above into 50:50 ratio, and subsequently filling the so created post of HS-I, a question has arisen as to whether the post may be filled as per reservation roster or by seniority. Initially, it was decided that the posts of HS-I as on 1.1.2006 should be filled as per reservation roster and accordingly promotion to the said post was made on notional basis w.e.f 1.1.2006. Some of the candidates belonging to reserved category, who were placed at a lower position in the seniority list were thus promoted to HS-I on 1.1.2006 against the respective reserved point. However, subsequently the Ordnance Factory Board clarified that the first senior most HSs should be placed in HS-1 and then the reservation roster should be followed. The said clarifications implied that the post of HS-I will be occupied by top 50% of the erstwhile HS cadre as on 01.01.2006 without resorting to any reservation at the initial stage. Subsequently, reservation roster was to be maintained for all promotion from HS-II to HS-I. That since aforesaid action taken by the factory was contrary to the clarification issued by OFB, the promotions of the affected persons were required to be cancelled. Consequently, the affected individuals who were promoted to HS-I w.e.f 01.01.2006 specifically against the reserved point were given opportunity against the proposed action of cancellation of their promotion to HS-I. That meanwhile, OFB, vide letter No.01/CR/Vol.II/A/I/658/I dated 5.8.2011, issued directives to all factories clarifying that 50% of the existing Highly Skilled employees as on 01.01.2006 shall be placed straight in the Highly Skilled Grade-I without insisting for reservation.

8.	As far as the applicants were concerned, they were appointed as Semi-skilled Workmen (`SKW for short) in different trades under the respondents. After two years of their respective appointments as SKW, they were confirmed as Skilled Workmen. Subsequently, vide Annexure A-2 letter No. 133 dated 25.07.2003 issued by the respondent No. 3, they were promoted as Highly Skilled (`HS for short) in the pay scale of Rs.4000-6000 based on the recommendations of the Vth Central Pay Commission as per sanctioned strength of the cadre. Thereafter, they were promoted as Highly Skilled Grade-I (HS-I) in the scale of pay of Rs.5200-20200 with Grade Pay of Rs.2800/- w.e.f. 01.01.2006 vide Annexure A-5 letter dated 18.03.2011. Subsequently, vide Annexure A-6 letter dated 05.08.2011 issued by the second respondent, it was clarified that 50% of the existing senior most Highly Skilled employees as on 01.01.2006 shall be placed straightway in the Highly Skilled Grade-I without insisting for reservation and thereafter representation of reserved categories will be worked out but the excess/shortfall found as per the reservation roster will be adjusted in due course. Pursuant to the said letter dated 05.08.2011, respondent No. 3 issued the Annexure A-7 (colly) letter dated 06.08.2011 by which the notice was issued to the applicants/Highly Skilled Grade-I regarding cancellation of their promotions. The applicants, vide Annexure A-8 (colly) letters, requested the respondents to grant them at least one months time to reply to the said notice but ignoring their request, they have issued the Annexure A-1 order dated 20.08.2011 cancelling the promotions of the applicants to the post of HS-I w.e.f. 01.01.2006 and re-designating them as HS-II, with immediate effect.

9.	According to the applicants, after they have been given the promotions, they have a vested right to remain in the promotional posts and it cannot just be cancelled. Further, according to them, the cancellation was motivated, mala fide and against the provisions contained in
Articles 14
and
of the Constitution of India. They have also submitted that the impugned order was passed against the principles of natural justice as adequate opportunity was not given to them to make a proper representation against it.

10.	The respondents in their reply have stated that the applicants were working in the Industrial Establishment of the factory in the grade of HS-II. Further, they have submitted that in terms of Ministry of Defence letter No. 11 (5)/2009-D (Civ.I) dated 14.06.2010 and OFB letter No. 01/CR/A/I/658 dated 13.12.2010, restructuring of industrial cadre was introduced retrospectively from 01.01.2006 and the restructured cadre consisted of a IV-grade structure of MCM, HS-I, HS-II and skilled. However, subsequent to the issuance of the aforesaid IV-grade structure, many issues had surfaced on which clarifications were sought from OFB/MOD. The OFB issued clarifications on various aspects and one among them was regarding applicability of reservation in effecting promotion on 01.01.2006 particularly with regard to filling up the post of HS-I. As per their letter dated 13.12.2010, the existing 55% posts of HS was further divided into following category from 01.01.2006:

(a)	25% of the above said 55% may be placed as MCM on 01.01.2006;

(b)	Remaining 75% of the 55% posts may be divided in a ratio of 50:50 as HS-I and HS-II respectively on 01.01.2006.

11.	They have further stated that while dividing the post into 50:50 ratio in the aforesaid manner and subsequently filling up those newly created HS-I posts, a question has arisen as to whether those posts should be filled as per reservation roster or by seniority. The above point was referred to OFB. Initially, it was decided that the post of HS-I became available on 01.01.2006 should be filled as per reservation roster and accordingly promotion to the post of HS-I was made on notional basis on 01.01.2006. Some of the candidates belonging to reserved category who were placed at a lower position in the seniority list were also promoted to HS-I on 01.01.2006 against the respective reserved point.

12.	However, subsequently in response to the factorys specific query, OFB clarified the position, vide their letter No.01/CR/Vol.II/A/1/658 dated 25.05.2011 that the first senior most HS should be placed to HS-I and then reservation roster should be followed. According to the respondents, the aforesaid clarification implied that the post of HS-I will be occupied by top 50% of the erstwhile HS cadre on 01.01.2006 as per orders of Cadre Restructuring without resorting to any reservation at the initial stage. Subsequently reservation roster is to be maintained for all promotion from HS-II to HS-I. But, according to them, the action taken by the factory was contrary to the clarification issued by OFB and, therefore, the promotions thus made were required to be cancelled. Consequently, the affected individuals who were promoted to HS-I grade on 01.01.2006 especially against the reserved point were given the opportunity to represent against the proposed action of cancellation of their promotion. However, in the meanwhile, OFB vide its letter No. 01/CR/Vol.II/A/I/658/I dated 05.08.2011 issued directives to all factories clarifying that 50% of the existing Highly Skilled employees as on 01.01.2006 shall be placed straightway in the Highly Skilled Grade-I without insisting for reservation. Consequent upon the above said order of the OFB and considering the representations received from the employees, the promotions to HS-I of individuals promoted against respective reservation points were cancelled vide factory order No. 11588 dated 30.08.2011.

13.	They have also relied upon the DOP&Ts OM No. 36012/82003-Estt. (Res) dated 25.10.2004 wherein it has given following clarifications to Ministry of Railways in response to their U.O. Note No. 2004-E (SCT) 1/2/1 dated 07.05.2001 on the subject of restructuring of Group C and Group D cadres in the Railway. The relevant portion is reproduced below:

..the Supreme Court in the matter of Union of India v. V.K. Sirothia has held that reservation for SCs and STs will not be applicable when making promotions to the posts upgraded on account of restructuring of cadres.
The Honble Court in the Contempt Petition No. 304 of 1999 (
All India Non SC/ST Employees Association v. V.K. Agarwal and Ors.
) further clarified that where the total number of posts remained unaltered, though in different scales of pay, as a result of re-grouping, it would be a case of upgradation of posts and not a case of additional vacancy or post being created to which the reservation principle would apply. If the case is restricted to all existing employees who were redistributed into different scales of pay as a result of upgradation, there cannot be any reservation.

14.	Further, they have relied upon the order of the Chandigarh Bench of this Tribunal in Unreserved employees
Association (Regd.) and Another Vs. Union of India & Anr.
(2005 (3) SLJ 47(CAT). The question of law considered in the said O.A was whether the policy of reservation shall apply to the scheme of restructuring en enforced by the respondents w.e.f. 1.1.2003 or not? The Bench answered that the policy of reservation in favour of members of SC/ST is not applicable to the restructuring scheme including exchange formula and the Respondents are directed to consider the applicants and other eligible persons for placing them in the appropriate pay scales under the restructured scheme as per their eligibility and suitability without any reference to reservation policy, from due date with all the consequential benefits, within a period of three months from the date of receipt of copy of this order. In view of the peculiar circumstances, parties are left to bear their own costs. The relevant part of the said order reads as under:

1. Through this judgment, we propose to dispose of 13 O.As., enumerated above, as all these cases involve identical facts and a common question of law i.e. Whether the policy of reservation shall apply to the scheme of restructuring as enforced by the respondents w.e.f. 1.1.2003 or not? With consent of ld. Counsel, reference is being made to facts in the case of Ravinder Kumar and Anr. v. Union of India and Ors., O.A. No. 331-HR of 2004, though we will also be making reference to some documents/judgments filed in other O.As., with specific mention thereof, which are not in the file of Ravinder Kumar.

2. Applicants in O.A. No. 331-HR of 2004 joined the respondent Railways as Clerks on 17.10.85 and 18.10.85, respectively. Both were promoted as Senior Clerk on 27.2.92 and then as a Head Clerk on 29.9.95 and 21.5.97, respectively. Claim that their seniority as Head Clerks was at Sr. Nos. 10 and 11, respectively in the Seniority List as on 24.10.2004, Annexure A-3. Promotion from the post of Head Clerk is to the post of Office Superintendent Gr. II by way of selection from amongst persons in the feeder category with two years' experience. To remove stagnation, the respondent Railways had been resorting to restructuring of cadres (done w.e.f. 1.1.79, 1.10.80, 1.1.84 and 1.3.93) by taking into consideration total strength of all categories in one cadre and then distributing the vacancies. In this process, reservation need not be effected as the reservation already stands followed as per the instructions of the Government/Railways. However, in all the restructuring policies undertaken on the dates aforesaid, there was provision of reservation. This was challenged before the Central Administrative Tribunal, Jodhpur Bench in O.A. 326/89 and reservation in restructuring of cadres was set aside. Applicants plead that the matter was taken by the Railway Administration to the Apex Court in Civil Appeal No. 1481/96 which was dismissed on 19.11.98 by passing the following order:

"This Court on 3.1.96 granted special leave but limited to the proposition that the reservation for SC and ST is not applicable in the case of upgradation of existing posts. This issue we have decided in Civil Appeal No. 3622/95 etc. In the light of that decision these appeals are dismissed...".

Civil Appeal No. 3622/95 carried the following decision:

"The finding of the Tribunal that the so-called promotion as a result of redistribution of posts is not promotion attracting reservation on the facts of the case, appears to be based on good reasonings. On facts, it is seen that it is case of upgradation on account of restructuring of the cadres, therefore, the question of reservation will not arise. We do not find any ground to interfere with the order of the Tribunal. The Civil Appeal is dismissed. No costs."

The clarificatory order of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, dated 31.1.2001, reads as under:

"It appears from all the decisions so far that, if as a result of re-classification or readjustment, there are not additional posts which are created and it is a case of upgradation, then the principle of reservation will not be applicable. It is on this basis that the Court on 19th November, 1998 had held that reservation for SC and ST is not applicable in the upgradation of existing posts and Civil Appeal No. 1481/1996 and the connected matter were decided against the Union of India. The effect of this is that where the total number of posts remained unaltered, though in different scales of pay, as a result of re-grouping and the effect of which may be that some of the employees who were in the scales of pay of Rs. 550-700 will go into the higher scales, it would be a case of upgradation of posts and not a case of additional vacancy or post being created to which the reservation principle would apply. It is only if in addition to the total number of existing posts some additional posts are created in respect of those additional posts the reservation will apply, but with regard to those additional posts the dispute does not arise in the present case. The present case is restricted to all existing employees who were redistributed into different scales of pay as a result of said upgradation.

Thus, the Hon'ble Supreme Court, as per judgments, Annexures A-4 to A-6, held that there will be no reservation in restructuring or upgradation of the posts in the restructuring for the obvious reason that in the restructuring of cadres, the overall strength of the category falling in one category remains the same and it undergoes a change category-wise and in each category, before restructuring, appropriate reservation is followed.

3. Applicants plead that the respondent Railway Administration, without curing the illegality earlier committed, and in defiance of the directions of CAT, Jodhpur Bench, that of the Hon'ble Apex Court, without any authority and in a contemptuous manner, have issued another policy for Group 'C' and 'D' employees on 16.10.2003 and a supplementary policy dated 13.1.2003, circulated as per Annexures A-1 and A-2, impugned in the present O.As. on account of a provision having been made in Clause No. 14 for grant of reservation to SC/ST, with a prayer that the same be quashed and set aside being violative of the directions of the Hon'ble Apex Court in Civil Appeals No. 3622/95 and 1481/96 and that the respondents be restrained from giving reservation to SC/ST category in the restructured cadre of Office Superintendents Grade II (Electrical) under DRM, NR, Ambala Cantt. with a further direction to consider the candidates for the upgraded posts. Clause 14, on the provision of reservation, though states that the existing instructions with regard of reservation of SC/ST, wherever applicable, will continue to apply, is a mere camouflage as it does not specifically say that reservation policy would apply in the restructuring, but the subordinate offices are interpreting it otherwise and have followed the reservation policy in some cases and in the restructured cadre of Office Superintendents Gr. I, promotions have been made according to the restructuring scheme and the points earmarked for reserved category candidates have been kept vacant. In case of Office Supdts. Gr. II (Electrical), restructuring has been done. The process of making promotions in the category of applicants is underway and there are 12 vacancies in the cadre of Office Supdt. Gr. II and position of applicant No. 1 is at Sr. No. 10 and that of applicant No. 2 is 11. In case, reservation is given, two posts would go to SC category and one to ST category and, in that process, applicants will be out of zone of consideration and would suffer irreparable loss.

4. Applicants plead that they made representation of the Divisional Railway Manager, Ambala on 25.3.2004 but to no effect. Further plead that the provision made in Clause 14, abovesaid, is null, void, illegal, harsh and is liable to be quashed as the benefit of reservation to the reserved categories cannot be given at the cost of general categories. Respondents cannot be allowed to give double benefit to the reserved category employees by granting benefit of reservation in the basic cadres before restructuring and again in the restructured cadres. If it is so done, the general category would be put to a very disadvantageous position and which would be against the very intention and spirit of the reservation policy.

5. A written statement has been filed by the respondents. Respondents plead that applicants have laid challenge to Railway Board letter RBE 177/2003 dated 9.10.2003 (Para 14) and RBE No. 05/2004 which are strictly in accordance with the Reservation Policy of Govt. of India. In case, an adverse order is passed, a large number of Railway staff would be affected. In Para 14, the direction is to apply in cadre restructuring the 'existing instructions' with regard to reservation of SC/ST. Therefore, whether or not reservation will apply in a particular restructuring scheme, will depend upon the existing reservation policy on the date of restructuring scheme. This is the distinguishing factor, vis-a-vis, cases of V. K. Sirothia and All India Non-SC/ST Employees Association and the same result will not follow in the present scheme. The Court may assess the issue afresh in the light of 'existing reservation policy.' Respondents have also filed a supplementary written statement and applicants have filed a rejoinder.

6. We have heard the ld. Counsel for the parties and have undertaken detailed examination of these files. While issuing notice in all these cases, respondents were restrained from giving reservation in restructuring of cadre from the posts involved in each of these cases, to the next higher grade/post. Such interim orders have continued to be in operation till today.

7. The short issue involved in these O.As., which emerges for our consideration, is as to whether restructuring of a cadre and adjustment of existing staff in such scheme can be termed to be a promotion and as to whether in such restructuring scheme, the members of the Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe category can be granted reservation as is available to them in the matter of normal promotions.

8. Mr. R.K. Sharma, learned Counsel for the applicants submitted that the issue is no longer res integra and has been clinched by orders passed by various Benches of the Tribunal and also as per law settled by the Hon'ble Apex Court. He referred to a series of decisions, starting from decision of Jabalpur Bench of the Central Administrative Tribunal titled as
Ashok Kumar Srivastava v. Union of India and Ors.
, (1987) 4 STC 385. In Paras 27 and 28 of the judgment, the Tribunal held as under:

"27. Consequently, we are of the view that in the present case the upgradation of ADMOs to DMOs involved neither a selection nor a promotion. It is simply nomination or placing of pay seniors to the upgraded posts with better pay scale, on the basis of seniority subject to suitability. In the circumstances of this case placing of these few seniors to their upgraded posts with better pay scale does not amount to any fresh appointment by promotion and moreover, these persons, so nominated to the higher grade, do not leave behind vacant their earlier posts.

28. For the above reasons and on the basis of facts of this case we hold that placing of ADMOs to the higher scale of DMOs in the 300 upgraded posts is neither promotion nor appointment and so reservation policy cannot be applied to this upgradation process. As no element of promotion or appointment is involved in upgradation of these 300 posts of ADMOs and since the policy of reservation for SC and ST can be applied only in the case of fresh appointment or promotion, it cannot be applied to these 300 upgraded posts. Under the circumstances the question of reserving percentages for SCs and STs insofar as these 300 upgraded posts are concerned, in regard to their incumbents including petitioners, and those similarly placed does not arise. We are in respectful disagreement with the views of Hon'ble M.P. High Court in their decision in
Dr. V.K. Vyas v. Union of India
as also of the Hon'ble Andhra Pradesh High Court, cited in Para 16 earlier, for the above reasons."

9. The above decision was upheld by the Hon'ble Apex Court in SLP No. 11801/87 decided on 8.12.1987 titled
Union of India v. A.K. Srivastava
and was relied upon by Jodhpur Bench of Central Administrative Tribunal in O.A. No. 326/89 (All India Non SC/ST Employees Association (Railway) Bikaner and Anr. v. Union of India and Ors. decided on 20.10.1992). It was held that reservation for SCs and STs is not applicable in the case of upgradation of existing posts. Respondents were directed to consider the applicants therein for being put against the upgraded posts in their respective cadre in accordance with the rules of seniority subject to the rejection of unfit and that no reservation will be applicable to the posts in question.
This view of the Tribunal was upheld in C.A. No. 1481/96 (Union of India and Ors. v. All India Non SC/ST Employee Assn. and Anr.) etc. The Hon'ble Apex Court in C.A. No. 3622 of 1995 titled as Union of Indian. V.K. Sirothia, decided on 19.11.1998 (Annexure A-5) upheld the finding of the Tribunal that "the so called promotion as a result of redistribution of posts is not promotion attracting reservation." The Hon'ble Apex Court further observed that on facts it is seen that it is a case of upgradation on account of restructuring of the cadres, therefore, the question of reservation will not arise. The Principal Bench of C.A.T., in O.A. No. 2123/93 (All India Non SC/ST Rly Employees Association etc. v. Union of India and Ors.) decided on 23.7.1999, while placing reliance on decision of Jodhpur Bench of Central Administrative Tribunal in O.A. No. 460/91 (Samsudden and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors.) decided on 9.5.1996, in which reliance was placed on earlier decision of Allahabad Bench of Tribunal in the case of N.K. Saini and Ors. v. The Director General RDSO and Ors., O.A. No. 414/87 and connected O.As., decided on 31.5.1988, which was upheld by Hon'ble Apex Court in C.A. No. 3622/85, took the view that reservation policy in the upgraded posts after restructuring of the cadre, whether en masse or on partial basis, is not tenable in the eyes of law. The issue again cropped up in Contempt Petition (Civil) No. 304/99 in C.A. No. 1481/1996 (All India Non SC/ST Empl.
Assn. (Railway)v. V.K. Agarwal and Ors.
before the Hon'ble Apex Court and it was held on 31.1.2001 that:

"... It appears from all the decisions so far that if as a result of reclassification or readjustment there is no additional posts which are created and it is a case of upgradation, the principle of reservation will not be applicable. It is on this basis that this Court on 19th November, 1988 had held that reservation for SC and ST is not applicable in the upgradation of existing posts and Civil Appeal No. 1481/1996 and the connected matters were decided against the Union of India. The effect of this is that where the total number of posts remained unaltered, though in different scales of pay, as a result of re-grouping and the effect of which may be that some of the employees who were in the scale of pay of Rs. 550-700 will go into the higher scales, it would be a case of upgradation of posts and not a case of additional vacancy or post being created to which the reservation principle would apply. It is only in addition to the total number of existing posts some additional posts are created that in respect of those additional posts the reservation will apply, but with regard to those additional posts the dispute does not arise in the present case. The present case is restricted to all existing employees who were redistributed into different scales of pay as a result of the said upgradation.

The Union of India shall re-work the seniority in the light of the clarification made today and report back within 6 weeks from today."

The consistent view of this Tribunal as well as of the Hon'ble Apex Court has been that there cannot be any reservation in the matter of restructuring upgradation of a cadre. Even the Railway Administration with a view to implement the decision of Jodhpur Bench of C. A.T., as upheld by the Hon'ble Apex Court, issued instructions dated 5.3.2001 (Annexure R-1) to implement the orders of the Hon'ble Apex Court.

10. The Bench put a query to the learned Counsel for the respondents as to how do they distinguish the present cases from the earlier view taken by the Tribunal and particularly, the view taken by the Hon'ble Apex Court in
V.K. Agarwal
's case (supra).
The learned Counsel tried to raise a distinction that earlier decisions were rendered when reservation was on "vacancy-based roster" and now after the judgment of R.K. Sabharwal's case, roster has been maintained post-based and each category has to be treated as a separate cadre. This, according to them, is a promotion and they have relied upon a circular of the Railway Board dated 21.8.1997 and judgement of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Girdhari Lal Kohli etc. etc. They tried to raise a distinction in the case of V. K. Agarwal on the ground that while disposing of the contempt petition in the case of V.K. Agarwal etc. (supra), the Hon'ble Apex Court did not agree to the petitioners' plea for extending the implementation to any other offices or to any other restructuring schemes (Annexure R-2). The learned Counsel further argued that the reservation policy of the Railways is best understood in the light of the Apex Court decision in the case of Girdhari Lal Kohli. In that case, the Allahabad High Court had held that circulars of Railways made reservation to the extent of 15% in favour of SCs in respect of appointment to the posts and not to the vacancies which may occur in the cadre. The Hon'ble Apex Court passed two interim orders on 24.2.1984 and 24.9.1984 to the effect that any promotions made during the pendency of the appeal will be subject to the result of the appeal and promotions which may be made thereafter will be strictly in accordance with the judgment of the High Court, etc. Based on the interim orders passed in 1984 the respondents have tried to project that reservation is applicable to the restructuring scheme.

11. The argument put-forth on behalf of the respondents does appear to be attractive but a close examination of the same shows that the issue as to whether reservation is applicable in the restructuring scheme was neither raised nor adjudicated upon in that case. The issue raised in that case was as to whether the reservation should be computed to the extent of 15% for SC and 7 1/2% for STs on posts and not on vacancies that may arise, from time to time. It was in that context that the Hon'ble Apex Court, while passing the final order dated 26.7.1995 (Annexure R-5), took the view that while implementing the circular dated November 17, 1984, the authorities will have regard to the law laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in Sabharwal's case. We fail to understand the logic advanced by the respondents in support of their contention when it has been held upto the highest Court of the country and that, too, after the final decision dated 26.7.1995 in the case of Girdhari Lal Kohli, supra, that reservation is not applicable in the cases of upgradation/restructuring. As to how they are sticking to their stand of making reservation in the scheme of restructuring is not understood. They are trying to apply the principle of reservation applicable in respect of promotions to the restructuring which is prohibited by law. It appears that they are not in a position to understand the difference between the terms "promotion" and "restructuring" (intended to give upgradation financially to meet stagnation).

12. The respondents have placed reliance on a decision of Jodhpur Bench of Central Administrative Tribunal in O.A. No. 86/1992, (All India Non-Scheduled Caste/Tribes Association (Railway) Bikaner and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors.), decided on 10.8.1993, in which even though the applicants were non-suited on number of defects in the pleadings but a finding was recorded that since there was partial upgradation of the posts and not mass upgradation, question of promotion arises. It appears that the respondent Ministry of Railways was well aware of the progress of litigation in the matter of reservation in restructuring but never cared to bring to notice the earlier orders passed by various Benches of the Tribunal, and even by Hon'ble Apex Court, wherein a definite view had already been taken that there cannot be any reservation in restructuring etc. and naturally, the settled proposition of law being not before the Tribunal in O.A. No. 86/1992, actuated it to take a different view. It is well settled that a decision taken by the Tribunal without taking into consideration the latest law settled by the Hon'ble Apex Court has to be treated as 'per incuriam' and cannot be treated as a good law, to be applied universally.
The reliance placed by the respondents on decision of Bombay Bench of C.A.T. in the case of Samual Paul Raj v. Union of India and Ors., decided on 31.3.1997 (Annexure R-7) and O.A. No. 46/2004 (
Harish Chandra v. The General Manager
etc.) decided on 26th July, 2004 of Lucknow Bench of C.A.T. is also of no help to them in view of the fact that these decisions do not take into account the law settled on the subject by the Apex Court and are 'per incuriam' and cannot be treated as binding. Reading of these judgments indicates that all earlier judgments, including that of the Apex Court mentioned above, were not brought to notice of the Benches of Lucknow and Bombay, at all. Since reliance is being placed on Supreme Court judgment on the legal issue involved, we feel no need of making a reference to a Larger Bench as the judgments of these two Benches are being treated as per-incuriam.

13. With reference to salient features of the restructuring scheme as explained in the supplementary written statement of respondents and decisions of Hon'ble Apex Court in
State of Rajasthan v. Fateh Chand Soni
, 1996 SCC 582;
Indira Sawhney v. Union of India
(1992) 22 ATC 385;
Ram Prashad and Ors. v. D.K. Vijay and Ors.
, (1999) SCC 251; Full Bench of C.A.T. Bangalore Bench in M.L. Rajaram Naik v. The Addl. Director, CGHS, Bangalore, 2000(2) ATJ 422, it has been argued on behalf of the respondents that placement in a higher scale on account of restructuring of cadre etc., amounts to "promotion" and thus, the reservation will be applicable.

14. The learned Counsel for the applicants countered the above argument raised by the learned Counsel for the respondents by relying upon a decision of Principal Bench of C.A.T. in O.A. No. 1540 of 2003 (
Shiv Kumar and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors.
) decided on 29.4.2004 (Annexure A-12), in which it was, inter alia, held that when a Full Bench decision is pitted against the decision of the Apex Court, the latter shall have to prevail being a binding precedent under
Article 141
of the Constitution of India and more particularly when the decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court is ignored in the Full Bench which renders it per incuriam. After considering the conflicting decisions of various Tribunals, the Bench, following the view taken by the Hon'ble Apex Court, held as under:

"54. We cannot describe these two orders passed as non-speaking orders or not laying a proposition of law. A definite proposition of law has been held to distinguish promotion from upgradation and the test is creation of additional posts. These orders are speaking orders and are binding precedent under
Article 141
of the Constitution of India. We follow the same and in that event, the decision of the Full Bench which has been on a wrong premises, per incuriam of these orders has to give way and is no more a binding precedent for us. We do not offend the doctrine of precedent while doing so.

55. to 58. xxx xxx xxx

59. In the result, for the foregoing reasons, we allow this O.A. Notification dated 15.9.2000 in so far as it provides reservation and notification dated 5.6.2003 and 6.6.2003 are quashed and set aside. The respondents are directed to accept the recommendations of the 5th
CPC
as upgradation and work out a methodology afresh in the light of decision in N. K. Saini 's case (supra) and then further process for filling up the posts of upgradation, reservation and consider applicants and other similarly circumstanced."

In the said judgment all the judgments relied upon by the respondents have been duly considered. Similarly, High Court of Delhi, in CWP No. 6090/2002 decided on 18.11.2003 (Union of India etc. v. All India Non-SC/ST Railway Employees etc.), while considering the issue as to whether the decision of the Tribunal which quashed Paragraph 10 of the Scheme dated 27.1.1993 is to be applied retrospectively or prospectively, came down heavily on the respondents, holding that the Tribunal has not taken a fresh decision but has followed only an "already settled" law.

15. In an M.A. No. 1773/2004, filed in O.A. No. 1173/2004, the Principal Bench of C.A.T. ordered that such of the SC/ST employees as have been allowed the benefit of reservation on upgraded posts with consequential seniority should not be further promoted till further orders. Thus, the consistent view, taken by the Courts, is that there cannot be any reservation in restructuring of cadres as under such scheme the incumbents are merely placed in the higher pay scale without any element of promotion.

16. A plea of post-based roster on the basis of R.K. Sabharwal's case and reliance on Girdhari Lal Kohli's case was duly placed by the respondents in Civil Appeal No. 1481/1996 before the Hon'ble Apex Court by way of affidavit, Annexure A-16, wherein the stand taken by them was that the affidavit is being filed to bring to the notice of the Hon'ble Apex Court the subsequent events, namely, the decision in the case of
Girdhari Lal Kohli and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors.
and the judgment of the Central Administrative Tribunal, Jodhpur Bench and that upgradation benefits are generally allowed on "as is where is basis" so that less/no disturbances are caused to employees due to resultant promotions as these are ordered in mid of school or college session. Incumbents of upgraded posts shoulder higher responsibilities as their commitment and involvement and sense of responsibility increases multifolds to achieve higher productivity by intensive utilisation and better upkeep of assets, thereby affecting minimum idle/failure time. It was also contended that it is difficult to appreciate as to how the applicability of rules of reservation can be excluded in the upgraded posts etc. etc. This stand of the respondents was not accepted by the Hon'ble Apex Court while deciding C.A. No. 1481 of 1996 and even C.P. arising therein. The respondents cannot be allowed to re-agitate the same issue, time and again.

17. Even a Bench of this Tribunal, in O.A. No. 426/PB/94, titled as
Pankaj Saxena v. Union of India and Ors.
, decided on 24th July, 2001 (in which one of us, Jasbir S. Dhaliwal, JM was a Member), considered the issue of reservation in restructuring scheme. That was a case of restructuring of certain Group 'C' and 'D' cadres introduced by order dated 27.1.1993, which included the Commercial Inspectors.

Placing reliance on a decision of Calcutta Bench of C.A.T. in the case of
Birender Kumar Dass v. Union of India and Ors.
, 1994(2)
ATJ 505 and Ashok Kumar Srivastava
(supra),
N.G. Praghu v. Chief Justice, Kerala
, 1973 Lab.
IC 1399 and V.K. Sirothia (supra), it has been clearly held that reservation would not be available while restructuring the cadre which amounts to only consideration of persons for being placed in the next higher grade on the basis of their service record and confidential reports for adjudging their fitness only. This judgment was upheld by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana in CWP No. 10217-CAT-2002 (Union of India and Ors. v. Pankaj Saxena and Anr.) decided on 22.7.2002.

18. Now we come to the scheme introduced by the respondent Railways which is under consideration in this case. Undisputedly, the scheme dated 9.10.2003 makes it clear that the benefit of restructuring will be restricted to the persons who are working in a particular cadre on the cut-off date. Since the cadres are being restructured on functional, operational and administrative considerations, the posts being placed in higher scales of pay as a result of restructuring should include the duties and responsibilities of greater importance. If prior to issue of these instructions, the number of posts existing in any grade, in any particular cadre, exceeds the number admissible on the revised percentages, the excess may be allowed to continue to be phased out progressively with the vacation of the posts by the existing incumbents. The duties, responsibilities and functions being performed by the employees of the restrictive cadres will be combined in a phased manner.
Each member of the cadre will have to be equipped with necessary skills and functions through proper training and development. In the initial stage of the merger, efforts should be made to post the employees in the categories in which they have been working etc. etc. A comparison of the Scheme dated 9.10.2003 (Annexure A-1) with one dated 27.1.1993, which was in issue in the case of
Pankaj Saxena
(supra), leaves no manner of doubt that there is no distinguishing features in the basic character of the both. The reservation provided in the Scheme dated 9.10.2003 is in Paragraph No. 14 which provides that the existing instructions with regard to reservation of SC/ST, wherever applicable, will continue to apply, whereas it was similarly mentioned in Para 10 of 1993 restructuring scheme.

19. Various features of the Scheme leaves no manner of doubt in our mind that this is a restructuring and placing of existing incumbents against higher pay scales and is not a "promotion." Hon'ble Supreme Court in Annexure A-5 has held "the so called promotion, as a result of redistribution of posts, is not promotion attracting reservation." This scheme is at par with the Scheme dated 27.1.1993. However, it appears that by passage of time and after facing various litigation, they thought of a clever idea to insert a clause by moulding the wording that "the existing instructions with regard to reservation of SC/ST wherever applicable will continue to apply." The respondents are trying to take advantage of this clause to enforce reservation in the restructuring which is not permissible either under instructions or law. We find that the case of the applicants is fully covered by the ratio of the law
laid down in
the case of
Pankaj Saxena
(supra). The placement in the higher pay scale in the restructuring scheme is not a promotion as held by various Benches of the Tribunal and even the Hon'ble Apex Court and, thus, there is no question of applicability of reservation formula in such restructuring. Seen from this angle, the insertion of Clause 14 in the Scheme and its application is illegal and has to be quashed for the reasons to follow.

20. Undisputedly, the view adopted by different Benches of the Tribunal, with certain per-incuriam exceptions, is that there cannot be any reservation in the restructuring scheme and as upheld by the Hon'ble Apex Court has become law which is binding on this Tribunal in view of
Article 141
of the Constitution of India. Once a law has been settled by the Courts, it has to be followed and the Administrative Authorities cannot undo such settled law by passing administrative orders. The Hon'ble Apex Court, in the case of
Govt. of Andhra Pradesh and Ors. v. G.V.K. Girls High School
, 2000(5) SLR 152, has held that the Legislature cannot overrule a judgment unless it removes the basis of the legal rights upon which the judgment is based with retrospective effect.

In
State of Haryana and Ors. v. Ram Kumar
etc. etc. JT 2000 (Suppp. I) SC 294, the Hon'ble Apex Court has held that by administrative orders, judgment of the Court cannot be overruled.
In R. Jambukeswaran and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors., 2004(2) ATJ 1, the Full Bench of Central Administrative Tribunal, Madras Bench, has held that the legislature by mere declaration without anything more, cannot directly overrule or override a judicial decision. It can render a judicial decision ineffective by enacting a valid law on the topic within its legislative field. A judicial pronouncement cannot be over-turned by issuing an administrative order. In this case, in Para No. 14 of memo, dated 9.10.2003 (Annexure A-1) relating to alleged reservation in the restructuring Scheme, which is in the nature of an administrative order, being against the law declared by the Hon'ble Apex Court on the subject, cannot be upheld by this Tribunal as it seeks to undo the law declared by the Hon'ble Apex Court. Once it has been accepted upto the Hon'ble Apex Court that there cannot be any reservation in restructuring, the action of the respondents in forcing such reservation, that too by issuing an administrative order, is declared as illegal. It is held that the policy of reservation to the extent of 15% and 71/2%, in favour of members of SCs/STs, is not applicable to the restructuring scheme. Admittedly, under the restructuring of the cadre, no additional posts have been created and it is a case of upgradation only of some posts in the lower categories, total number of posts remaining the same, (for example, see Annexure A-7) and, thus, the principle of reservation is not attracted. In other words, the effect of this is that where the total number of posts remained unaltered, though in different scales of pay, as a result of regrouping and the effect of which may be that some of the employees, who were in the scale of pay of Rs. 5000-8000, will go into the higher scales of Office Superintendent (Rs. 5500-9000) etc., it would be a case of upgradation of posts only and not a case of additional vacancy or post being created to which the reservation principle would apply. The total number of posts i.e. 75 + 8 in the hierarchy remains the same. The present case is restricted to all existing employees who were redistributed into different scales of pay as a result of the said restructuring scheme which is not applicable to staff, other than the existing staff.

21. Even the Railway Administration by its own stand taken in supplementary written statement at Page 139 of the paper book, has itself admitted that existing strength of particular cadre of posts will include different categories with different pay scales and instance given by them in Para 3, sub-para (i) of supplementary written statement filed on behalf of respondents in O.A. No. 231-HR of 2004 is reproduced as under.

"Let us take that the existing strength of a particular cadre of posts in different categories with different pay scales as 100 and on the basis of the existing percentage and revised percentage is like:

Category Existing Number of Revised Number of % age posts before % age posts restructuring
Thus, there is no force in the contention of the respondents that each category has to be treated as a separate cadre. As a matter of fact, if this contention is accepted, that an increase in the number of posts in one category, as a result of restructuring or upgradation of posts, is to be treated as creation of new additional post and thus subject to reservation then it will amount to reservation applied thrice over to the same post. There cannot be reservation in the matter of restructuring and upgradation of the posts.

22. We are of the opinion that the respondents are trying to narrow down the scope and meaning of the term "Cadre". The definition of the word "cadre" given in Fundamental Rule 9(4), which is pari materia to the rules of Railway Administration, means the strength of service or part of service sanctioned as a separate unit. By interpreting this definition, the word "cadre" will include all the categories in particular wing of service. For instance in the clerical cadre, it will include all the categories starting from Clerk upto Office Superintendent and similar will be the position in the technical cadres and it cannot be given a restricted meaning so as to restrict it to only one category out of the total service on the basis of one scale of pay. Railway Board letter mentioning that each scale of pay is to be treated as a cadre, is hereby declared illegal. The framers of our Constitution had provided in
Article 16
to make an exception from the equal opportunity of jobs under the State in favour of any class or classes of posts for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes where they are not adequately represented or for making provision of such reservation in favour of Backward Classes of citizens requiring such help and uplifting in the society in jobs under the State. Through various judgments, such Govt. of India instructions providing for reservation in recruitment, and in promotions as well, has been recognized. However, the basic intention is to provide not only protection to the reserved categories but enhanced protection of law for their appointments, whether direct or through promotion. We need not repeat the philosophy behind the provisions of reservation. However, it was never meant to give all the positions in a particular cadre to the reserved categories so as to put the unreserved categories to a big disadvantage. In case contention of respondents is accepted that each scale of pay, with four or more less scales of pay for one particular cadre, to be treated as a separate cadre, with the application of policy of reservation, the top two scales of pay would be earned by reserved categories alone by both on the reserved points in the roster as well as on the basis of length of service achieved due to reservation on each scale of pay. In our considered opinion, such was never and could not have been the intention while laying down the policy of reservation.

23. It has been argued by almost all the ld. Counsel for respondents that the distinction between 1993 Scheme of restructuring and the present scheme is that earlier Railways had been operating (not at all Stations) a vacancy-based roster but now in view of judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in R.K. Sabharwal's case post-based rosters have been made applicable w.e.f. 10.2.1995 onwards. It is, thus, argued that under the existing instructions of reservation, this shall make all the difference. We have considered this distinction after hearing the ld. Counsel at length. In our opinion, reservation applied when vacancy-based rosters were being operated under some Railways and reservation applies when new post-based rosters are being operated, in matters of direct recruitment and promotions. The question before us is : Whether reservation shall, at all, apply in the matter of scheme of restructuring, which is now available? As mentioned above, we have not noticed any points of distinction between the earlier schemes of restructuring as applied by the Railways from time to time, particularly 1993 Scheme from the present Scheme. Each Scheme of restructuring had a clause for making reservation in the process of restructuring and had clauses giving the benefits after restructuring and placement in the higher scale of with benefits under FR 22(1)(a) which are normally given at the time of promotion. As discussed above, Hon'ble Supreme Court, the Hon'ble High Court of Kerala, of Punjab, and of Delhi have already held that such schemes of restructuring shall not attract reservation in the so-called promotions. These are to be treated only tentamount to higher status while remaining on the same pedestal. The Scheme of restructuring may provide a process of moving upwards, whereas a promotion, in fact, has the effect of taking a frog-leap from the lower pedestal to the next higher pedestal leaving behind the original platform. The fact, however, cannot be ignored that there is no addition of posts in the total strength and it is only upgradation provided to a few of the total posts. In our opinion, it is immaterial whether the reservation is to vacancy-based or post-based as we are clear in our mind that in the Scheme of restructuring the policy of reservation does not apply at all.

24. In some of the Original Applications viz. O.A. No. 680/PB of 2004 titled as Sri Bhagwan and Anr. v. Union of India and Ors. and O.A. No. 773-PB of 2004 titled
Sarabjit Singh and Anr. v. Union of India and Ors.
, declaration has been sought that even the principle of exchange of vacancies from SC to ST and vice versa is not applicable in the restructuring of the cadres. Since we have taken a view that there cannot be reservation in the matter of restructuring and upgradation of posts, in present case it is 2003 Scheme, there is no question of applying reservation through method of exchange.

25. Before parting, we may, with advantage, make reference to a recent clarification/directions given by Govt. of India, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, Department of Personnel and Training, as contained in their letter dated 25th October, 2004 which is in reply to a note received from Ministry of Railways dated 7th May, 2004 on the controversy involved in the present case. We are reproducing the said letter below:

"Subject: Restructuring of Group 'C' and group 'D' cadres in the Railways--Application of reservation to Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes.

The undersigned is directed to refer to the Ministry of Railways U.O. Note No. 2004-E(SCT) 1/25/1 dated 7th May, 2001 on the subject noted-above and to say that the Supreme Court in the matter of Union of India v. V.K. Sirothia has held that reservation for SCs and STs will not be applicable when making promotions to the posts upgraded on account of restructuring of cadres.
The Hon'ble Court in the Contempt Petition No. 304 of 1999 (
All India Non SC/ST Employees Association v. V.K. Agarwal and Ors.
) further clarified that where the total number of posts remained as unaltered, though in different scales of pay, as a result of re-grouping, it would be a case of upgradation of posts and not a case of additional vacancy or post being created to which the reservation principle would apply. If the case is restricted to all existing employees who were redistributed into different scales of pay as a result of upgradation, there cannot be any reservation.

2. The matter has been examined keeping in view the observations of the Supreme Court. The Ministry of Railways are advised to implement the directions of the Supreme Court and not to apply reservation while filling the posts upgraded on account of restructuring, by the existing employees."

After going through this O.M. and reading the same with our conclusions arrived at on the basis of various judgments, particularly of the High Courts of Punjab, Delhi and Kerala and Supreme Court judgments, in our opinion, Ministry of Railways would be bound by the clarification given by DOPT and would issue their own circular on similar lines.

26. Consequently, for the foregoing reasons, the original applications are allowed. The impugned Paragraph No. 14 of Memo dated 9.10.2003 (Annexure A-1) is quashed and set aside with a declaration that the policy of reservation in favour of members of SC/ST is not applicable to the restructuring scheme, abovesaid, including exchange formula. Respondents are directed to consider the applicants and other eligible persons for placing them in the appropriate pay scales under the restructuring scheme as per their eligibility and suitability without any reference to reservation policy, from due date with all the consequential benefits, within a period of three months from the date of receipt of copy of this order. In view of the peculiar circumstances, parties are left to bear their own costs.

15.	The Ministry of Defence has again taken up the issue regarding reservation in restructuring of cadre with the DOPT in the light of the judgment of the Apex Court in the matter of
Bharat Sanchar Nigam Vs. R. Santhakumari Velusamy & Ors.
(2011 STPL (Web) 781 SC). The question involved in the said case was whether rules of reservation will apply to upgradation of posts. The relevant part of
the said judgment
is as under:

14.
Article 16(4)
enables the State to make any provision for reservation of appointment or posts in favour of any backward classes of citizens.
Article 16(4A)
enables the State to make any provision for reservation in matters of promotion, with consequential seniority, to any class or classes of posts in the services under the State in favour of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, which in the opinion of the State, are not adequately represented in the services under the State. As upgradation involves neither appointment nor promotion, it will not attract reservation. Upgradation involves mere conferment of financial benefits by providing a higher scale of pay. If there is mere upgradation of posts, as contrasted from promotion, reservation provisions would not apply. [See : All India Employees Association (Railways) vs. V.K. Agarwal - 2001 (10) SCC 165 and Union of India vs. V. K. Sirothia - 2008 (9) SCC 283].

15. In V.K. Agarawal this Court held:

"It appears from all the decisions so far that if as a result of reclassification or readjustment, there are no additional posts which are created and it is a case of upgradation, then the principle of reservation will not be applicable. It is on this basis that this Court on 19.11.1998 had held that reservation for SC and ST is not applicable in the upgradation of existing posts and CA No.1481 of 1996 and the connected matters were decided against the Union of India. The effect of this is that where the total number of posts remained unaltered, though in different scales of pay, as a result of regrouping and the effect of which may be that some of the employees who were in the scale of pay of Rs.550-700 will go into the higher scales, it would be a case of upgradation of posts and not a case of additional vacancy or post being created to which the reservation principle would apply. It is only if in addition to the total number of existing posts some additional posts are created that in respect of those additional posts the reservation will apply, but with regard to those additional posts the dispute does not arise in the present case. The present case is restricted to all existing employees who were redistributed into different scales of pay as a result of the said upgradation."

(emphasis supplied)

16. The decision of this Court in V.K. Sirothia arose from a decision of the Allahabad Bench of the Tribunal which expressed a similar view (in V.K. Sirothia vs. Union of India - O.A. No.384/1986). The Tribunal held:

"The restructuring of posts was done to provide relief in terms of promotional avenues. No additional posts were created. Some posts out of existing total were placed in higher grade to provide these avenues to the staff who were stagnating. The placement of these posts cannot be termed as creation of additional posts. There were definite number of posts and the total remained the same. The only difference was that some of these were in a higher grade. It was deliberate exercise of redistribution with the primary object of betterment of chance of promotion and removal of stagnation."

The Union of India challenged the said order of the Tribunal and this Court by a brief order dated 19.11.1998 (Union of India vs. V.K. Sirothia - 2008 (9) SCC 283) dismissed the appeal by a brief order. The relevant portion of the said order is extracted below :

"The finding of the Tribunal that "the so-called promotion as a result of redistribution of posts is not promotion attracting reservation" on the facts of the case, appears to be based on good reasoning. On facts, it is seen that it is a case of upgradation on account of restructuring of the cadres, therefore, the question of reservation will not arise. We do not find any ground to interfere with the order of the Tribunal."

17. We may next consider the concepts of `promotion' and `upgradation'. In Lalit Mohan Deb, this Court explained the difference between a promotion post and a selection grade :

"It is well recognised that a promotion post is a higher post with a higher pay. A selection grade has higher pay but in the same post. A selection grade is intended to ensure that capable employees who may not get a chance of promotion on account of limited outlets of promotions should at least be placed in the selection grade to prevent stagnation on the maximum of the scale. Selection grades are, therefore, created in the interest of greater efficiency."

18.
In
Tarsen Singh vs. State of Punjab
- 1994 (5) SCC 392, this Court defined `promotion' thus:

"Promotion as understood under the service law jurisprudence means advancement in rank, grade or both. Promotion is always a step towards advancement to a higher position, grade or honour."

19. In S.S. Ranade the scope and meaning of the word `promotion' was considered. The issue
in that case
was whether a Commandant (Selection Grade) held a higher rank than a Commandant and consequently entitled to be superannuated at a later age of 58 years instead of 55 years. This Court, following the decision in Lalit Mohan Deb, held as follows:

"Undoubtedly, a Commandant who becomes a Commandant (Selection Grade) secures a promotion to a higher pay scale. But it is a higher pay scale in the same post. The use of the word 'promotion' in Rule 6 and the Constitution of a Departmental Promotion Committee for selection of Commandant (Selection Grade) in Rule 7, do not necessarily lead to the conclusion that the promotion which is contemplated there is necessarily a promotion to a higher post. Promotion can be either to a higher pay scale or to a higher post. These two Rules and the use of the word 'promotion' there do not conclude the issue.

********

In the present case, an element of selection is involved in granting selection grade because there is no automatic promotion to the selection grade pay scale. But this factor is not decisive. In the present case also, as in the above cases, Selection Grade posts are created entirely for the purpose of granting some relief to those who have very limited avenues of getting promotion to a higher post. That is why a higher pay or pay scale is granted in the same post. Thus, by its very nature, a selection grade post cannot be considered as a higher post for the purposes of Rule 9.

...Because the creation of a selection grade in the same post stands on a very different footing. By its very nature a selection grade provides a higher pay or a higher pay scale in the same post. The beneficiary of a selection grade does not thereby occupy a post which is higher in rank than the post earlier occupied by him."

(emphasis supplied)

On facts, this Court found that the respondent therein required a promotion which resulted in occupation of a post which was higher in rank than the post earlier occupied, to get the relief of longer service. This Court held that though his promotion from Commandant to Commandant (Selection Grade), resulted in a promotion to a higher pay scale, that was not sufficient to grant relief to the respondent therein as his promotion to selection grade did not involve advancement to a higher post.

20. In Fateh Chand Soni, this Court following Ranade defined `promotion' thus:

"The High Court, in our opinion was not right in holding that promotion can only be to a higher post in the service and appointment to a higher scale of an officer holding the same post does not constitute promotion. In the literal sense the word "Promote" means "to advance to a higher position, grade, or honour". So also "Promotion" means "advancement of preferment in honour, dignity, rank or grade". [See: Webster's Comprehensive Dictionary, International Edition, p. 1009]. "Promotion" thus not only covers advancement to higher position or rank but also implies advancement to a higher grade. In service law also the expression "Promotion" has been understood in the wider sense and it has been held that "Promotion can be either to a higher pay scale or to a higher post."

(emphasis supplied)

21. The distinction between upgradation and promotion was spelt out by a Full Bench of the Kerala High Court in N.G. Prabhu vs. Chief Justice, Kerala High Court - 1973 (2) Lab. IC 1399, thus :

"Promotion is, of course, appointment, to a different post carrying a higher scale of pay in the service. If, to better the conditions of service of the incumbents in posts in the same category the scale of pay of all the posts in the category is raised, the incumbents would naturally get the higher scale of pay. But in such a case it may not be proper to characterize the event as a promotion to higher posts though a benefit of a higher scale of pay is obtained by all concerned. In other words, if the upgradation relates to all the posts in a category naturally, there is no sense in calling it a promotion of all the persons in that category. That is because there is no question of appointment from one post to another. Parties continued to hold same posts but get a higher scale of pay. It may be that it is not all the posts in a particular category that are so upgrade, but only a part of it. Normally, the benefit of such upgradation would go to the seniors in the category. They would automatically get a higher scale of pay. That is because though their posts continue in the same category a higher scale of pay is fixed for those posts. It is appropriate then to say that the seniors have been nominated to the higher grade which has been so created by upgradation. This phenomenon does not differ from the case where all the posts are upgraded and, it appears to us that those who get the higher grade cannot be said to have been `promoted' because here again there is no question of appointment from one post to another. They continue to hold the same post, but because of seniority in the same post they are given a higher scale of pay. When a person is nominated to the higher scale of pay from time to time based on seniority, it may perhaps be loosely termed as a promotion."

22. But even in cases where no additional posts were created, but where a process of selection was involved in the upgradation, the process has to be considered not as an upgradation simplicitor, but a process of promotion and therefore the principles of reservation would be attracted. We may refer to the Constitution Bench decision of this Court in
Ram Prasad
(supra) where this Court held that appointment from senior scale to selection scale is a promotion though it may not be a promotion to a higher position and consequently the reserved candidates are entitled to be promoted to the selection scale by way of roster points. For this purpose, the Constitution Bench relied upon the decision of Fateh Chand Soni.

23.
In
Fateh Chand Soni
(supra), the issue was whether seniority in the selection grade (in the Rajasthan Police Service) was to be fixed on the basis of date of appointment to the selection scale or on the basis of seniority in the senior scale irrespective of the date on which appointment was made to the selection scale. This Court held that appointment to the selection scale of an officer in the senior scale in the service constituted promotion and seniority in the selection scale had to be fixed on the basis of the date of selection and a person selected and appointed as a result of an earlier selection would rank senior to a person who is selected and appointed as a result of a subsequent selection. We note below the reasoning of this Court :

"In
Lalit Mohan Deb v. Union of India
, the pay scale of all the Assistants in the Civil Secretariat in Tripura was Rs.80-180 and on the basis of the recommendations of the Second Pay Commission appointed by the Government of India the scales were revised and 25% of the posts were placed in the Selection Grade in the scale of Rs. 150-300 and the rest continued in the old pay scale of Rs.80-180. For the purpose of filling the Selection Grade posts, a test was held and those who qualified in the said test were appointed to the Selection Grade. The Assistants in the Selection Grade and the Assistants in the old pay scale were doing the same type of work. This Court observed that "provision of a Selection Grade in the same category of posts is not a new thing" and that "a Selection Grade is intended to ensure that capable employees who may not get a chance of promotion on account of limited outlets of promotions should at least be placed in the Selection Grade to prevent stagnation on the maximum of the scale" and that "Selection Grades are, therefore created in the interest of greater efficiency". The Court took note of the fact that the basis for selection of some of the Assistants to the Selection Grade scale was seniority-cum-merit which is one of the two or three principles of promotion widely accepted in the administration and, therefore, the creation of Selection Grade in the category of Assistants was not open to challenge. In that case, the Court had proceeded on the basis that the appointment to the higher grade amounted to promotion.

The Rules governing appointment to the Selection Scale in the Service also envisage that such appointment constitutes promotion. The relevant provision is contained in Rule 28(A) of the Rules which prescribes the criteria, eligibility and procedure for promotion to Junior, Senior and other posts encadred in the Service. Under sub-rule (5) of Rule 28(A) promotion from the lowest post or category of post in the Service to the next higher post or category of post in the Service is required to be made strictly on the basis of seniority-cum-merit. Sub-rule (6) of Rule 28(A) provides that selection for promotion to all other higher posts or higher categories of posts in the Service shall be made on the basis of merit and on the basis of seniority-cum-merit in the proportion of 50:50."

(emphasis supplied)

24.
In
Dayaram Asanand Gursahani v. State of Maharashtra
- 1984 (3) SCC 36 a three Judge Bench of this Court held :

".........As mentioned earlier, the selection grade post is not a post to which promotion has to be made nor is there any efficiency bar rule attached to it. Further it is not shown that the Governor had issued any executive instructions as it had been done in
Sant Ram Sharma v. State of Rajasthan and Anr.
(1968) 1 SCR 111 and in
Lalit Mohan Deb and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors.
(1973) 3 SCC 862 enabling the High Court to withhold increments in the extended pay scale which is in this case called as selection grade pay scale. The pay scale to which a judicial officer is entitled is a condition of service which can be regulated by a statute or rules made under the proviso to
Article 309
or by executive instructions issued under
Article 162
of the Constitution. It cannot come within the range of the expression 'control' in
Article 235
of the Constitution. (See B.S. Yadav and Ors. etc. v. State of Haryana and Ors. etc. (1981) 1 SCR 1024). It is only where there is such a law, rule or executive instruction, the High Court may act under
Article 235
of the Constitution to sanction it or to refuse to sanction it. We are of the view that in the present case the mere nomenclature given to the extended pay scale as the selection grade pay scale does not lead to the inference that there is an element of selection involved in sanctioning it. In the circumstances it should be treated as just an extended pay scale which forms part of the pay scale of Rs. 900-1800 as clarified in two Government orders sanctioning the selection grade posts. ........."

25. The aforesaid decision in Dayaram Asanand Gursahani was distinguished in Fateh Chand Soni on the following reasoning :

"The High Court has referred to the decision of this Court in
Dayaram Asanand Gursahani v. State of Maharashtra and Ors.
[1984] 2 SCR 703, wherein, after considering the resolution of the State Government sanctioning the post of District Judge in the Selection Grade, this Court has held that the said resolution did not indicate that there was any process of promotion by selection or otherwise from the cadre of District Judges to the Selection Grade District Judges. In the particular facts of that case it was held that mere nomenclature given to the extended pay scale as the Selection Grade pay Scale does not lead to the inference that there is no element of selection involved in sanctioning it and that it should be treated as just an extended pay scale which forms part of the pay scale. The position in the present case is, however, different. Here the Selection Scale is a separate scale and is not an extension of the Senior Scale. Moreover appointment to the Selection Scale is made by selection on the basis of merit and seniority-cum-merit in accordance with Rule 28(A) of the Rules."

26. In view of the decisions in Dayaram Asanand Gursahani, Fateh Chand Soni and Ram Prasad, the position that emerges is that even where the upgradation does not involve appointment to a different or higher post, but is as a result of a promotional process involving selection, then the principles of reservation are attracted.

27.
In
Union of India vs. Pushpa Rani
- 2008 (9) SCC 242, this Court examined the entire case law and explained the difference between upgradation and promotion thus :

"In legal parlance, upgradation of a post involves transfer of a post from lower to higher grade and placement of the incumbent of that post in the higher grade. Ordinarily, such placement does not involve selection but in some of the service rules and/or policy framed by the employer for upgradation of posts, provision has been made for denial of higher grade to an employee whose service record may contain adverse entries or who may have suffered punishment. The word `promotion' means advancement or preferment in honour, dignity, rank, grade. Promotion thus not only covers advancement to higher position or rank but also implies advancement to a higher grade. In service law, the word `promotion' has been understood in wider sense and it has been held that promotion can be either to a higher pay scale or to a higher post.

Once it is recognized that additional posts becoming available as a result of restructuring of different cadres are required to be filled by promotion from amongst employees who satisfy the conditions of eligibility and are adjudged suitable, there can be no rational justification to exclude applicability of policy of reservation while effecting promotions, more so because it has not been shown that procedure for making appointment by promotion against such additional posts is different than the one prescribed for normal promotion.

Policy contained in Letter dated 9.10.2003 has been framed with a view to strengthen and rationalize the staffing pattern. For this purpose, the Ministry of Railways undertook review of certain cadres. The basis of the review was functional, operation and administrative requirement of the Railways. This exercise was intended to improve efficiency of administration by providing incentives to existing employees in the form of better promotional avenues and at the same time requiring promotees to discharge more onerous duties.

The policy envisaged that additional posts becoming available in the higher grades as a sequel to restructuring of some of the cadres should be filled by promotion by considering such of the employees who satisfy the conditions of eligibility including minimum period of service and who are adjudged suitable by the process of selection. This cannot be equated with upgradation of posts which are required to be filled by placing existing incumbents in the higher grade without subjecting them to the rigor of selection. It has therefore to be held that the Railway Board did not commit any illegality by directing that existing instructions with regard to the policy of reservation of posts for SC and ST will apply at the stage of effecting promotion against the additional posts. The Tribunal committed serious illegality by striking down para 14 of letter dated 9.10.2003. Matters relating to creation and abolition of posts, formation and structuring/restructuring of cadres, prescribing the source/mode of recruitment and qualifications, criteria of selection, evaluation of service records of employees fall within the exclusive domain of employer. What steps should be taken for improving efficiency of the administration is also the preserve of the employer. Power of judicial review can be exercised in such matters only if it is shown that the action of the employer is contrary to any constitutional or statutory provision or is patently arbitrary or is vitiated by mala fides. The court cannot sit in appeal over the judgment of the employer and ordain that a particular post be filled by direct recruitment or promotion or by transfer. The court has no role in determining the methodology of recruitment or laying down the criteria of selection. It is also open to the court to make comparative evaluation of the merit of the candidates. The court cannot suggest the manner in which the employer should structure or restructure the cadres for the purpose of improving efficiency of administration."

(emphasis supplied)

28. In Pushpa Rani, this Court while considering a scheme contained in the letter dated 9.10.2003 held that it provided for a restructuring exercise resulting in creation of additional posts in most of the cadres and there was a conscious decision to fill-up such posts from promotion from all eligible and suitable employees and, therefore, it was a case of promotion and, consequently, reservation rules were applicable.

29. On a careful analysis of the principles relating to promotion and upgradation in the light of the aforesaid decisions, the following principles emerge :

(i) Promotion is an advancement in rank or grade or both and is a step towards advancement to higher position, grade or honour and dignity. Though in the traditional sense promotion refers to advancement to a higher post, in its wider sense, promotion may include an advancement to a higher pay scale without moving to a different post. But the mere fact that both - that is advancement to a higher position and advancement to a higher pay scale - are described by the common term `promotion', does not mean that they are the same. The two types of promotion are distinct and have different connotations and consequences.

(ii) Upgradation merely confers a financial benefit by raising the scale of pay of the post without there being movement from a lower position to a higher position. In an upgradation, the candidate continues to hold the same post without any change in the duties and responsibilities but merely gets a higher pay scale.

(iii) Therefore, when there is an advancement to a higher pay scale without change of post, it may be referred to as upgradation or promotion to a higher pay scale. But there is still difference between the two. Where the advancement to a higher pay-scale without change of post is available to everyone who satisfies the eligibility conditions, without undergoing any process of selection, it will be upgradation. But if the advancement to a higher pay-scale without change of post is as a result of some process which has elements of selection, then it will be a promotion to a higher pay scale. In other words, upgradation by application of a process of selection, as contrasted from an upgradation simplicitor can be said to be a promotion in its wider sense that is advancement to a higher pay scale.

(iv) Generally, upgradation relates to and applies to all positions in a category, who have completed a minimum period of service. Upgradation, can also be restricted to a percentage of posts in a cadre with reference to seniority (instead of being made available to all employees in the category) and it will still be an upgradation simplicitor. But if there is a process of selection or consideration of comparative merit or suitability for granting the upgradation or benefit of advancement to a higher pay scale, it will be a promotion. A mere screening to eliminate such employees whose service records may contain adverse entries or who might have suffered punishment, may not amount to a process of selection leading to promotion and the elimination may still be a part of the process of upgradation simplicitor. Where the upgradation involves a process of selection criteria similar to those applicable to promotion, then it will, in effect, be a promotion, though termed as upgradation. A

(v) Where the process is an upgradation simplicitor, there is no need to apply rules of reservation. But where the upgradation involves selection process and is therefore a promotion, rules of reservation will apply.

(vi) Where there is a restructuring of some cadres resulting in creation of additional posts and filling of those vacancies by those who satisfy the conditions of eligibility which includes a minimum period of service, will attract the rules of reservation. On the other hand, where the restructuring of posts does not involve creation of additional posts but merely results in some of the existing posts being placed in a higher grade to provide relief against stagnation, the said process does not invite reservation.

30. In this case, the BCR scheme did not involve creation of additional posts but merely restructured the existing posts as a result of which 10% of the posts in Grade III were placed in a higher grade (Grade IV) to give relief against stagnation. This is evident from the terms of the BCR scheme and the clarification contained in the letter dated 7.5.1993 that no posts were sanctioned, as far as 10% BCR was concerned.

31. In this case, the BCR scheme dated 16.10.1990 provided that the persons who had completed 26 years of service would be screened by a duly constituted Review Committee to assess the performance and suitability for advancement. The screening was for the limited purpose of finding out whether the service record of the employee contained any adverse entries or whether the employee had suffered punishment. The screening process did not involve consideration of comparative merit nor involve any selection. The 10% posts were upgraded strictly by seniority subject to screening. This is evident from the terms of BCR scheme and the Circular dated 13.12.1995 which provided that the promotions to Grade IV were to be based on seniority in the basic grade from among the officers in Grade III, subject to fitness determined as per OTBP manner, that is screening to ascertain whether there are any adverse comments or punishment against the employee concerned.

32. To sum up, the BCR scheme was an upgradation scheme to give relief against stagnation. It did not involve creation of any new posts. It did not involve advancement to a higher post. It did not involve any process of selection for conferment of the benefit of higher pay-scale. The upgradation was given to the senior most 10% of BCR scale employees in Grade III strictly as per seniority. BCR scheme as per circular dated 16.10.1990 was thus a scheme for upgradation simplicitor without involving any creation of additional posts or any process of selection for extending the benefit. Such a scheme of upgradation did not invite the rules of reservation.

33. We accordingly allow these appeals, set aside the orders of the High Court and the Tribunal and dismiss the Original Applications challenging the order of the telecom department dated 8.9.1999.

16.	According to the respondents, they are examining the matter, in view of the aforesaid judgement, in consultation with the Ministry of Law.

17.	We have heard the learned counsel for the applicants Shri Devendra Pal Mann and the learned counsel for the respondents Shri V.S.R. Krishna. It is seen that the applicants were working as Highly Skilled (HS) in OPTO Electronics Factory, Raipur, one of the production unit of Ordnance Factory Board. The respondents have restructured the grade structure of the industrial cadre and the pay scales/pay bands w.e.f. 01.01.2006. Prior to the restructuring, the said cadre consisted of Skilled, Highly Skilled (HS). The Skilled and HS was in the ratio of 45:55. Further, the 25% of HS was placed in MCH. In other words, the HS grade was represented by 41% and Master Craftsman (MCH) by 14%. The applicants were admittedly working as HSs with the reorganisation of the cadre with retrospective effect of 01.01.206 introduced in the Factories under the OFB vide their letter dated 13.12.2010, the industrial cadre was restructured as under:



Sl.No.	Grade	Pay Band	Grade Pay
I	Skilled	PB-1,Rs.5200-20200	Rs.1900
II	Highly Skilled, Grade-II	PB-1,Rs.5200-20200	Rs.2400
III	Highly Skilled, Grade-I	PB-1,Rs.5200-20200	Rs.2800
IV	Master Craftsman	PB-2,Rs.9300-34800	Rs.4200


18.	Consequently, the representation of the different grades in the industrial trades has also undergone change as under:



Sl.No.	Grade	Percentage
I	Skilled	45
II	HS-II	20.625
III	HS-I	20.625
IV	MCM	13.75


19. Thus, the post of HS has been divided into 50:50 ratio between HS and HS-1. Initially, the respondents applied reservations in granting the grade of HS-I and the applicants who belong to SC/ST category found their place in HS-1 category with higher pay scales and grade pay by the order of the respondents dated 24.03.2011. Consequently, they were upgraded from the pay scale of PB-1 Rs.5200-20,200 with grade pay of Rs.2400 to PB-1 Rs.5200-20,200 with Grade Pay of Rs.2800/-. Later on, the OFB clarified that the first senior most HS only to be placed in HS-1 and thereafter the reservation roster should apply. According to the respondents, the said clarification of the OFB would mean that the top 50% the erstwhile HS cadre as on 01.01.2006 will be given to HS-I post without applying any reservation. Therefore, the upgradations of the applicants as HS-1 was correct. Later on, the OFB has held that the upgradation made applying reservation was wrong and accordingly the applicants were found not eligible to be upgraded on HS-I. The respondents relied upon the judgment of the Apex Court in V.K. Sirothas case (supra) wherein it was held that reservation for SCs and STs will not be applicable when making promotions to the posts upgraded on account of restructuring of cadres.
Again in V.K. Agarwals case (supra), the Apex Court clarified that where the total number of posts remained unaltered, though in different scales of pay, as a result of re-grouping, it would be a case of upgradation of posts and not a case of additional vacancy or post being created to which the reservation principle would apply. If the case is restricted to all existing employees who were redistributed into different scales of pay as a result of upgradation, there cannot be any reservation. Based on the aforesaid judgments of the Apex Court, the Chandigarh Bench of this Tribunal has held that policy of reservation in favour of members of SC/ST is not applicable to the restructuring scheme, abovesaid, including exchange formula. Respondents were directed to consider the applicants and other eligible persons for placing them in the appropriate pay scales under the restructuring scheme as per their eligibility and suitability without any reference to reservation policy. However, the respondents themselves have now stated that with the judgment of the Apex Court in
Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. Vs. R. Santhakumari Velusamy & Ors.
(supra) the position regarding reservation in the upgraded posts on account of restructuring has undergone a shift as the Apex Court has held in the said case as under:

Where there is a restructuring of some cadres resulting in creation of additional posts and filling of those vacancies by those who satisfy the conditions of eligibility which includes a minimum period of service, will attract the rules of reservation. On the other hand, where the restructuring of posts does not involve creation of additional posts but merely results in some of the existing posts being placed in a higher grade to provide relief against stagnation, the said process does not invite reservations.

20.	The respondents have also stated in their affidavit dated 12.04.2010 that in view of the changed circumstances, the DOP&T is re-examining the issue in consultation with the Ministry of Law.

21.	In view of the above circumstances, we dispose of this OA with the direction to the respondents to inform the decision, if any, already taken in the matter, to the applicants immediately. In case, they have not taken any decision in the matter so far, they shall take it without any further delay, but in any case, within a period of three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order under intimation to the applicants. If the applicants are still aggrieved, they are at liberty to approach this Tribunal again, through appropriate proceedings. There shall be no order as to costs.

(DR. VEENA CHHOTRAY) 	(G. GEROGE PARACKEN)
MEMBER (A)				 MEMBER (J)

`SRD