Central Administrative Tribunal - Delhi

Giriraj Sharma vs M/O External Affairs on 7 March, 2023
Central Administrative Tribunal
Principal Bench, New Delhi

O.A. No.1392/2016
Reserved on: 17.02.2023
Pronounced on: 07.03.2023
Hon'ble Mr. Anand Mathur, Member (A)
Hon'ble Mr. Manish Garg, Member (J)

Sh. Giriraj Sharma
S/o Sh. Ram Pal Sharma
R/o 83, Sarvodaya Nagar,
Near Vijay Nagar Check Post,
Ghaziabad (UP).
Working as LDC,
Regional Passport Office,
Ministry of External Affairs, Govt. of India,
Hudco Trikoot-3, Bhikaji Cama Place,
R.K. Puram, New Delhi-110066.
...Applicant

(By Advocate: Sh. R.V. Sinha and Sh. Amit Sinha)

Versus

1. Union of India through
Ministry of External Affairs,
South Block, New Delhi - 110 011
(Through : The Secretary).

2. The Passport Officer,
Regional Passport Office,
Ministry of External Affairs,
Govt. of India, Hudco Trikoot-3,
Bhikaji Cama Place,
R.K. Puram, New Delhi-110066.

3. The Joint Secretary (CPV & PSP) &
Chief Passport Officer,
Ministry of External Affairs,
Patiala House, Tilak Marg,
New Delhi-110 001.
...Respondents

(By Advocate: Mr. Gyanendra Singh)
OA No.1392 of 2016

ORDER

By Hon'ble Mr. Manish Garg, Member (J):

Learned counsel for the applicant stated as under:-

1.1 The applicant was initially appointed as daily rated

Casual Worker by the respondents on 14.06.1989.

Subsequently, he along with others was granted temporary

status w.e.f. 15.03.1994 and his services were regularized

against Group-D post w.e.f. 15.03.2004. After qualifying

the departmental examination conducted by the

respondent to the post of Lower Division Clerk (LDC), the

applicant was appointed as such w.e.f. 09.07.2008.

1.2 Similarly situated LDCs, who were initially engaged as

daily rated casual workers during 1988 to 1990, seeking

regularization of their services with effect from the date of

their initial engagement as casual workers with all

consequential benefits, had approached before this

Tribunal by filing OA Nos. 1557/1998 and 436/2005

(
Ravindranath V.K. & Ors. vs. UOI & Ors.
and
A.R.

Parameswaran & Ors. vs. UOI & Ors.
], which were

allowed vide Orders dated 14.07.2003 and 13.06.2005,

respectively with a direction to the respondents to grant the

benefits of regularization with effect from their date of

initial engagement as casual workers with all consequential
OA No.1392 of 2016

benefits other than seniority namely eligibility to appear in

the promotion tests or examinations and for terminal

benefits etc.

1.3 In compliance of the aforesaid decisions of the

Tribunal, the respondents vide order dated 06.12.2006

granted the benefits of notional fixation of pay, eligibility to

appear in the test/examination for higher grade, counting

of qualifying service for terminal benefits from the date of

their initial engagement.

1.4 On coming to know that the respondents have

regularized the services of similarly situated persons from

the date of their initial engagement, applicant made a

representation dated 22.10.2009 to the respondents

seeking similar reliefs in terms of the aforesaid decision of

the Tribunal.

1.5 Various Superintendents/Assistants working under

the respondents also approached the Ernakulam Bench of

this Tribunal by filing OA Nos.75/2010, 82/2010 and

196/2010 seeking regularization from the date of their

initial engagement, which were also allowed by a common

order dated 12.08.2011 in terms of its earlier order passed

in OA No.1557/2008 (supra). In compliance, the
OA No.1392 of 2016

respondents had also granted the benefits to the applicants

therein vide order dated 11.05.2012.

1.6 The applicant herein also espoused his grievance

through the Association seeking benefit of the aforesaid

orders of the Tribunal by filing representation dated

06.12.2012. As a model employer, the respondents ought to

have extended similar benefits to the similarly situated

persons like the applicant to avoid frustration among the

employees, but they adopted „pick and choose‟ policy in

granting such benefits on their own thereby discriminating

the applicant.

1.7 Feeling aggrieved, the applicant approached the

Tribunal by way of OA No.1920/2013 seeking extension of

benefits as granted by the Ernakulam Bench, but the said

OA was allowed to be withdrawn vide order dated

22.09.2015, with liberty to file fresh one with better

particulars. Hence, the instant OA has been filed seeking

the following reliefs:-

"(i) Call for the relevant records of the
respondents in the matter;

(ii) Declare that the applicant is entitled for
extension of benefits of the

orders/judgments dated 14.07.2003 and
13.06.2005 [Annexure A-3(Colly)] of
Ernakulam Bench of this Hon‟ble Tribunal
in OA Nos.1557/1998 and 436/2005 titled
"
Ravindranath V.K. & Ors. vs. Union of
India & Ors.
" and "
A.R. Parameswaran &
OA No.1392 of 2016

Ors. vs. UOI & Ors.
" respectively and also
common order/judgment dated 12.08.2011
(Annexure A-8) in OA Nos.75/2010,
82/2010 & 196/2010;

(iii) Declare that the applicant is entitled for
being regularized as L.D.C. w.e.f.

14.06.1989, i.e. the date of his initial
engagement as daily rated casual worker,
re-fixation of his pay as LDC from the date
of his initial engagement, i.e. 14.6.1989,
payment of arrears of pay from the date of
his regularization and counting of his
casual service for the purpose of
terminal/retiral benefits.

(iv) Direct the respondents to regularize the
applicant as L.D.C. w.e.f. 14.6.1989, i.e.,
the date of his initial engagement as daily
rated casual worker and to re-fix the pay of
the applicant as LDC from the date of his
initial engagement, i.e. 14.6.1989, with all
consequential benefits, viz., consequential
promotion/ACP/MACP benefits, payment of
arrears of pay from the date of his
regularization and counting of his casual
service for the purpose of terminal/retiral
benefits.

(v) Further direct the respondents to pay
interest at the rate decided by this Hon‟ble
Tribunal on arrears of pay.

(vi) Order exemplary cost against the
respondents and in favour of the
applicant."

2. Per contra, the respondents filed a counter affidavit.

Besides admitting the factual matrix of the case, they

stated that the applicant was afforded an opportunity to

appear in the Special Qualifying Examination conducted in

1993 for direct appointment to the post of LDC, but he

could not qualify the same. They also submitted that the

applicant was promoted to the post of LDC from the post of

Daftry, therefore, he is not entitled to regularization form
OA No.1392 of 2016

the initial date of his engagement without passing the

prescribed test for LDC. Moreover, it is pertinent to

mention here that Casual Labourers and Daily Rated

Clerks are two different categories of workers, hence, not

comparable.

2.1 In view of the above position, learned counsel for the

respondents argued that the case of the applicant is not

covered by decisions of the Tribunal relied upon by him,

hence, the instant OA lacks merit and deserved to be

dismissed.

3. The applicant has filed rejoinder to the reply filed on

behalf of the respondents denying their averments and

reiterating the facts of the OA.

4. The respondents have also filed an additional affidavit

to the rejoinder filed by the applicant more or less

reiterating their stand taken in the reply, as mentioned

above.

5. We have heard Mr. R.V. Sinha assisted by Mr. Amit

Sinha, learned counsel for the applicant; Mr. Gynendra

Singh, learned counsel for the respondents and perused

the pleadings available on record as well as the decisions

relied upon by the learned counsels for both the parties.
OA No.1392 of 2016

The learned counsel for applicant has also filed the written

submissions.

ANALYSIS

6. The crux of the matter is that what would be the

relevant date of regularization that is to say whether initial

date of engagement or shall it be prospective i.e. date of

promotion to the post of LDC? In other words, whether

casual employees subsequently regularized are entitled for

regularization from the date of their initial engagement?

6.1 In
State Of Haryana & Ors. vs Piara Singh & Ors
.

[1992 AIR 2130, 1992 SCR (3) 826], the Hon‟ble Supreme

Court observed as under:-

10. Ordinarily speaking, the creation and abolition of a
post is the prerogative of the Executive. It is the Executive
again that lays down the conditions of service subject, of
course, to a law made the appropriate legislature. This
power to prescribe the conditions service can be exercised
either by making Rules under the proviso to
Article 309
of
the Constitution or (in the absence of such Rules) by
issuing Rules/instructions in exercise of its executive
power. The court comes into the picture only to ensure
observance of fundamental rights, statutory provisions,
Rules and other instructions, if any, governing the
conditions of service. The main concern of the court in
such matters is to ensure the Rule of law and to see that
the executive acts fairly and gives a fair deal to its
employees consistent with the requirements of
Articles 14

and
16.
It also means that the State should not exploit its
employees nor should it seek to take advantage of the
helplessness and misery of either the unemployed
persons or the employees, as the case may be. As is often
said, the State must be a model employer. It is for this
reason, it is held that equal pay must be given for equal
work, which is indeed one of the directive principles of
the Constitution. It is for this very reason it is held that a
person should not be kept in a temporary or ad hoc
status for long. Where a temporary or ad hoc appointment
OA No.1392 of 2016

is continued for long the court presumes that there is
need and warrant for a regular post and accordingly
directs regularization.
While all the situations in which
the court may act to ensure fairness cannot be detailed
here, it is sufficient to indicate that the guiding principles
are the ones stated above. The principle relevant in this
behalf are stated by this Court in several decisions, of
which it would be sufficient to mention two decisions
having a bearing upon the issue involved here. They are
Dharwad Distt.
P.W.D. Literature Daily Wage Employees
Association v. State of Karnataka and Ors.
[1990] 2

S.C.C. 396 and Jacob v Kerala Water Authority
alleged
that about 50,000 persons were being employed on daily-

rated or on monthly-rated basis over a period of 15 to 20
years, without regularizing them. It was contended that
the very fact that they are continued over such a long
period is itself proof of the fact that there is regular need
for such employment. "

Xxxxxx

"25. Before parting with this case, we think it appropriate
to say a few words concerning the issue of regularization
of adhoc/temporary employees in government service.
The normal rule, of course, is regular recruitment through
the prescribed agency but exigencies of administration
may sometimes call for an adhoc or temporary
appointment to be made. In such a situation, effort
should always be to replace such an adhoc/temporary
employee by a regularly selected employee as early as
possible. Such a temporary employee may also compete
along with others for such regular selection/appointment.
If he gets selected, well and good, but if he does not, he
must give way to the regularly selected candidate. The
appointment of the regularly selected candidate cannot
be withheld or kept in abeyance for the sake of such an
adhoc/temporary employee.

Secondly, an adhoc or temporary employee should not be
replaced by another adhoc or temporary employee; he
must be replaced only by a regularly selected employee.
This is necessary to avoid arbitrary action on the part of
the appointing authority.

Thirdly, even where an adhoc or temporary employment
is necessitated on account of the exigencies of
administration, he should ordinarily be drawn from the
employment exchange unless it cannot brook delay in
which case the pressing cause must be stated on the file.
If no candidate is available or is not sponsored by the
employment exchange, some appropriate method
consistent with the requirements of
Article 16
should be
followed. In other words, there must be a notice
published in the appropriate manner calling for
OA No.1392 of 2016

applications and all those who apply in response thereto
should be considered fairly.

An unqualified person ought to be appointed only when
qualified persons are not available through the above
processes.

If for any reason, an adhoc or temporary employee is
continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must
consider his case for regularisation provided he is eligible
and qualified according to rules and his service record is
satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to
the reservation policy of the State.

The proper course would be that each States prepares a
scheme, if one is not already in vogue, for regularisation
of such employees consistent with its reservation policy
and if a scheme is already framed, the same way be
made consistent with our observations herein so as to
reduce avoidable litigation in this behalf. If and when
such person is regularised he should be placed
immediately below the last regularly appointed employee
in that category, class or service, as the case may be.

So far as the work-charged employees and casual labour
are concerned, the effort must be to regularise them as
far as possible and as early as possible subject to their
fulfilling the qualifications, if any, prescribed for the post
and subject also to availability of work. If a casual
labourer is continued for a fairly long spell - say two or
three years - a presumption may arise that there is
regular need for his services. In such a situation, it
becomes obligatory for the concerned authority to
examine the feasibility of his regularisation. While doing
so, the authorities ought to adopt a positive approach
coupled with empathy for the person. As has been
repeatedly stressed by this court, security of tenure is
necessary for an employee to give his best to the job. In
this behalf, we do commend the orders of the Government
of Haryana (contained in its letter dated 6.4.90 referred
to hereinbefore) both in relation to work-charged
employees as well as casual labour.

We must also say that the orders issued by the
Governments of Punjab and Haryana providing for
regularisation of adhoc/temporary employees who have
put in two years/one year of service are quite generous
and leave no room for any legitimate grievance by any
one.

These are but a few observations which we thought it
necessary to make, impelled by the facts of this case,
and the spate of litigation by such employees. They are
not exhaustive nor can they be understood as immutable.
Each Government or authority has to devise its own
criteria or principles for regularisation having regard to all
OA No.1392 of 2016

the relevant circumstances, but while doing so, it should
bear in mind the observations made herein."

6.2 Pursuant to
the above decision
, Ministry of Personnel,

Public Grievances and Pensions (Deptt. of Personnel and

Training, Casual Labourers (Grant of Temporary Status

and Regularisation) Scheme came into force w.e.f.

1.9.1993. The salient features of the said Scheme are

reproduced as under:-

"3. This scheme is applicable to casual labourers in
employment of the Ministries/Departments of
Government of India and their attached and
subordinate offices, on the date of issue of these
orders. But it shall not be applicable to casual
workers in Railways, Department of
Telecommunication and Department of Posts who
already have their own schemes.

4. Temporary Status

(i) Temporary status would be conferred on all
casual labourers who are in employment on the
date of issue of this OM and who have rendered a
continuous service of at least one year, which
means that they must have been engaged for a
period of at least 240 days (206 days in the case
of offices observing 5 days week).

(ii) Such conferment of temporary status would be
without reference to the creation/availability of
regular Group `D‟ posts.

(iii) Conferment of temporary status on a casual
labourer would not involve any change in his
duties and responsibilities. The engagement will be
on daily rates of pay on need basis. He may be
deployed anywhere within the recruitment
unit/territorial circle on the basis of availability of
work.

(iv) Such casual labourers who acquire temporary
status will not, however, be brought on to the
permanent establishment unless they are selected
through regular selection process for Group `D‟
posts.
OA No.1392 of 2016

5. Temporary status would entitle the casual
labourers to the following benefits:-

(i) Wages at daily rates with reference to the
minimum of the pay scale for a corresponding
regular Group `D‟ official including DA, HRA and
CCA

(ii) Benefits of increments at the same rate as
applicable to a Group `D‟ employee would be taken
into account for calculating pro-rata wages for
every one year of service subject to performance of
duty for at least 240 days, 206 days in
administrative offices observing 5 days week) in
the year from the date of conferment of temporary
status.

(iii) Leave entitlement will be on a pro-rata basis at
the rate of one day for every 10 days of work,
casual or any other kind of leave, except maternity
leave, will not be admissible. They will also be
allowed to carry forward the leave at their credit on
their regularisation. They will not be entitled to the
benefits of encashment of leave on termination of
service for any reason or on their quitting service.

(iv) Maternity leave to lady casual labourers as
admissible to regular Group `D‟ employees will be
allowed.

(v) 50% of the service rendered under
temporary status would be counted for the
purpose of retirement benefits after their
regularisation.

(vi) After rendering three years‟ continuous service
after conferment of temporary status, the casual
labourers would be treated on par with temporary
Group `D‟ employees for the purpose of contribution
to the General Provident Fund, and would also
further be eligible for the grant of Festival
Advance/Flood Advance on the same conditions as
are applicable to temporary Group `D‟ employees,
provided they furnish two sureties from permanent
Government servants of their Department.

(vii) Until they are regularized, they would be
entitled to Productivity Linked Bonus/ Ad- hoc
bonus only at the rates as applicable to casual
labourers.

6. No benefits other than those specified above will
be admissible to casual labourers with temporary
status. However, if any additional benefits are
admissible to casual workers working in Industrial
establishments in view of provisions of Industrial
OA No.1392 of 2016

Disputes Act
, they shall continue to be admissible
to such casual labourers.

7. Despite conferment of temporary status, the
services of a casual labourer may be dispensed
with by giving a notice of one month in writing. A
casual labourer with temporary status can also
quit service by giving a written notice of one month.
The wages for the notice period will be payable
only for the days on which such casual worker is
engaged on work.

8. Procedure for filling up of Group `D‟ posts

(i ) Two out of every three vacancies in Group `D‟
cadres in respective offices where the casual
labourers have been working would be filled up as
per extant recruitment rules and in accordance
with the instructions issued by Department of
Personnel and Training from amongst casual
workers with temporary status. However, regular
Group `D‟ staff rendered surplus for any reason
will have prior claim for absorption against
existing/future vacancies. In case of illiterate
casual labourers or those who fail to fulfill the
minimum qualification prescribed for post,
regularisation will be considered only against
those posts in respect of which literacy or lack of
minimum qualification will not be a requisite
qualification. They would be allowed age relaxation
equivalent to the period for which they have
worked continuously as casual labourer.

9. On regularisation of casual worker with
temporary status, no substitute in his place will be
appointed as he was not holding any post.
Violation of this should be viewed very seriously
and attention of the appropriate authorities should
be drawn to such cases for suitable disciplinary
action against the officers violating these
instructions.

10. In future, the guidelines as contained in this
Department‟s OM dated 7.6.88 should be followed
strictly in the matter of engagement of casual
employees in Central Government offices.

11. Department of Personnel and Training will
have the power to make amendments or relax any
of the provisions in the scheme that may be
considered necessary from time to time. "

The applicant was granted termprorary status on
15.3.1994.
OA No.1392 of 2016

From the above, it can been seen that vide Office Order

dated 15.3.2004, the applicant was appointed as

"Watchman", the said Office Order reads as under:-

"In pursuance of U.S.(PV), MEA, New Delhi‟s
approval order No.V.IV/578/1/2003 dated 13.03.2004,
Shri Giriraj Sharma, Casual Labourer holding temporary
status Group „D‟ post wef 01-9-1993 vide RPO, Delhi
Office Order No.1/18/86/Admn dated 15.3.2004, is
appointed as Watchman (Gp.‟D‟) in this office with effect
from 15.03.2004 (FN) in the scale of Rs.2550-55-2660-
60-3200.

(i) The appointment is purely temporary and may
be terminated at any time by a month‟s notice
given by either side viz. the appointee or by
appointing authority without assigning any
reasons. The appointing authority, however,
reserves the right of terminating the service of
appointee forthwith before the expiry of the
stipulated period of notice by giving/taking
payment of a sum equivalent to pay &
allowances for the period of notice or unexpired
portion thereof.

(ii) He should be prepared to serve in any RO/PO‟s
already opened or to be opened in future to
which he may be posted at any time and a
singed bond to this effect should be furnished by
him on his appointment.

(iii) He will be governed by the Central Passport
Organization & Constitution and Maintenance
Rules and Orders applicable to the Central
Government employees in force and amended
from time to time.

2. His appointment will be further subject to :-

(a) production of certificate of fitness from
competent authority.

(b) Submission of a declaration in the event of
the candidates having more than one wife
living, the appointment will be subject to
his being accepted from the enforcement of
the requirement in this behalf.

(c) Taking an oath of allegiance/faithfulness
to the Constitution of India.
OA No.1392 of 2016

3. His character and antecedents will be verified
through the police, if any, his adverse report is
received, his service will be liable to be terminated.

4. If any declaration given or information furnished
by him is proved to be false or if he is found to have
willfully suppressed any material information, he will
be liable to be removed from service, or such other
action which Govt. may deem necessary."

6.3 In
Kamaraj And Ors. vs Union Of India (Uoi) And

Anr.
[: 2006 (3) SLJ 256 CAT], decided by a Coordinate

Madras Bench of this Tribunal, issue of Limited Competitive

Departmental Examination came to be considered and was

observed as under :-

"5. The post we are concerned is the Lower Division
Clerk (LDC) which is coming within the purview of the
Ministry of External Affairs, Central Passport
Organisation (Group 'C posts) Recruitment Rules,
2004. Schedule 3 provides for method of recruitment,
age limit and other qualifications. The relevant
schedule dealing with LDC is extracted below:

1. Name of Post: Lower Division Clerk

2. Number of Post: 570 (20O4) (subject to variation
depending on workload)

3. Classification : "General Central Services, Group 'C,
Non-Gazetted Ministerial

4. Scale of pay : Rs. 3050-75-3950-80-4590

5. Whether Selection or non-selection post: Selection.

6. Whether benefit of added years of service
admissible under Rule 30 of the CCS (Pension) Rules,
1972 : No

7. Age Limit for direct recruits : 25 years (Relaxable for
Government servants upto 35 years in accordances
with the instructions or orders issued by the Central
Government) Note: The crucial date for determining the
age limit shall be the closing date for receipt of
applications from candidates in India (and not the
closing date prescribed for those in Assam,
Meghalaya, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Manipur,
Nagaland, Tripura, Sikkim, Laddakh Division of
Jammu and Kashmir State, Lahul and Spiti district
and Pangi sub-division of Chamba district of Himachal
OA No.1392 of 2016

Pradesh, Andaman and NicobarIslands or
Lakshdweep.) In respect of posts, the appointments to
which are made through Employment Exchange, the
crucial date for determining the age limit shall, in each
case, be the last date upto which the Employment
Exchanges are asked to submit the names.

8. Educational and other qualifications required for
direct recruits : Matriculation or equivalent with typing
speed of 30 w.p.m. In English or 25 w.p.m. in Hindi.

9. Whether age and educational qualification
prescribed for direct recruits will apply in case of
promotees:

Candidates for limited Departmental Competitive
Examination must have educational and typing
qualifications prescribed for direct recruits.

10. Period of Probation if any: Two years for all
persons appointed to the post on direct recruitment
through Staff Selection Commission.

11. Method of Recruitment whether by direct
recruitment or by promotion or deputation or
adsorption and percentage of vacancies to be filled bx
various methods:

75% by direct recruitment through Staff Selection
Commission, 25% by Limited Departmental
Competitive Examination failing which by direct
recruitment.

12. In case of recruitment by promotion or deputation
or absorption grades from which promotion or
deputation or absorption to be made:

Limited Departmental Competitive Examination: Group
'D' employees of the Central Passpost Organisation
with five years service in their grade rendered after
appointment thereto on a regular basis and
possessing educational and typing qualifications
prescribed for direct recruits.

13. If a Departmental Promotion Committee exists
what is its composition : Group 'C Departmental
Promotion Committee (for confirmation):

(a) Director in the Consular, Passport and Visa
Division --Chairman

(b) One Deputy Secretary in charge of the
administration of the Central Passport Organisation --
Member

(c) Two Deputy Secretaries in the Ministry of External
Affairs --Members

(d) One Passport Officer or Deputy Passport Officer of
the cadre of the Central Passport Organisation --

Member.

The above rules stipulate that 24% of the vacancies
are to be filled up by LDCE and 75% by direct
recruitment through Staff Selection Commission. For
OA No.1392 of 2016

the 25% quota, persons eligible are Group 'D'
employees with 5 years of regular service in their
grade rendered after appointment.

6. A plain reading of the statutory rules shows that
there is no scope for promotion of Casual employees
through LDCE. 75% by direct recruitment through SSC
alone can be available for Casual or other employees
in the open market.

7. The method of recruitment namely direct
recruitment through Staff Selection Commission and
the promotion through LDCE are different and the
source of recruitment for both these are different.
Therefore, there is absolutely no scope for bypassing
the statutory rules by the authorities concerned as
stated in the reply statement. The respondent have
not replied to grounds a, b and c in the O.A. On the
other hand, the respondents have stated that they
have gone out of their way and got the required
permission to hold a Special qualifying Examination
for the benefit of the Casual workers. It is their further
stand that since the recruitment through Staff
Selection Commission is likely to take a long time,
they have decided to fill up the available vacancies by
eligible Group 'D' and Casual workers. The
respondents have failed to note that the Casual
workers are not eligible as per the statutory rules to
appear for promotion since they are not regular
workers borne in the cadre of the Department.
xxxxxx

"12. In the Notification calling for LDCE dated
7.1.2005, there is no mention of eligibility of casual
employees for the said examination. Annexure A-IV
clearly shows that the proposed examination is to be
conducted for promotion of Group 'D' officials to the
grade of LDC and further Group 'D' officials of Central
Passport Organisation who will be completing 5 years
of regular service in Group 'D' post as on 31.5.2005
and have passed Matriculation are eligible to appear
in this examination. Contrary to this Circular, the
Application Form was issued making it appear that it
is a combined examination for Group 'D' employees
and Casual workers. This appears to be misreading of
the rules and an attempt has been made to permit the
persons who are ineligible to be promoted through
back door entry method of promotion. In so far as the
casual employees are concerned, they have to avail
themselves of the route of direct recruitment. As it is
rightly argued, Group 'D' employees cannot be
combined with that of Casual workers and any such
permission would be an arbitrary decision of treating
the unequals as equals. Casual workers are not in the
feeder category to compete along with Group 'D'
employees for promotion to the post of LDC. The
respondents' action amounts to bypassing the
OA No.1392 of 2016

statutory rules by permitting the casual employees to
appear for the examination intended for Group 'D'
employees. There is a separate provision for direct
recruitment through competitive examination under the
75% of the vacancies. There is no scope for allowing
the casual employees in the vacancies for Group 'D'
employees.

13. The respondents have enclosed certain documents
i.e. Written communication/letters, the correspondence
between the Secretary to the Department. It is not
known to what extent these correspondences may
override the statutory rules. The letter issued by the
Secretary, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions dated 9.8.2005 categorically says that
the DOPT could not agree to the proposal on the
ground that the scheme for Special Qualifying
Examination approved by the DOPT in 1993 was the
last one and that all direct recruitment vacancies of
Clerks/Stenographers etc. thereafter were required to
be filled only through the normal Clerks Grade
Examination conducted by the Staff Selection
Commission and that regularisation in this manner
would be a case of back door entry and will have
wide repercussions. The letter further says that the
Department would have no objection if all such newly
sanctioned Group 'D' posts are filled from amongst
casual employees. Ultimately, they say that the
problem can be sorted out by holding Special
Qualifying Examination as a one time measure. The
letter further says that it is for the Ministry of External
Affairs to decide whether Special Qualifying
Examination is the comprehensive solution to the
problem they have been working for. Department of
Expenditure may also be consulted. From the above
letter, it is clear that the DOPT is the nodal agency for
approval have not so far granted approval. That apart,
unless the decision of the Government is issued in the
form of a Govt. Order under
Article 73
, the letter of
communication cannot be taken as the decision of the
Government so as to hold a Special Qualifying
Examination. The said letter has no legal force and
cannot be pressed into service to oppose the relief. In
the above circumstances, it is surprising as to how the
Assistant Passport Officer who has sworn to the
affidavit has taken a decision on behalf of the Ministry
as stated in Paragraph 8 of the reply that this Ministry
has decided to fill up the available vacancies at LDC
level by eligible Group 'D' and Casual workers. In
Paragraph 11 it is stated that they have gone out of
their way and got the required permission to hold a
Special Qualifying Examination for the benefit of the
Casual Workers. No such specific permission is
pointed out or furnished before this Tribunal. In our
view it is a blatant violation of the statutory rules and
the procedure of taking a policy decision without
OA No.1392 of 2016

reference to the relevant Department. We also note
that the reply statement in this O. A. is directly in
conflict to the reply filed and the stand taken in O.A.
73 of 2005.

14. Casual Labourers (Grant of Temporary Status and
Regularisation) Scheme of Government of India, 1993
came into force from 1.9.1993 also provides for
procedure for filling up of Group 'C posts for the
Casual labourers who have been granted temporary
status. The present method of selection is contrary to
the said scheme also.
In a recent judgment of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Union of India v.
Gagan Kumar
2005 AIR SCW 3594 : 2005(3) SLJ 7
(SC), held that the Clause 4 of the Scheme (Scheme of
1993) does not appear to be a general guideline to be
applied for the purpose of giving temporary status to
all the casual workers, as and when they complete
one year's continuous service. Their Lordships held as
follows: "Of course, it is up to the Union Government to
formulate any Scheme as and when it is found
necessary that the casual labourers are to be given
temporary status and later they are to be absorbed in
Group 'D' posts. Therefore, there is no scope of the
Casual labourers to straightaway seek for
appointment to Group 'C posts.

15. In so far as the regularisation of casual workers
recruited to perform duties of Group 'C posts, Ministry
of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
(Department of Personnel and Training) in O.M. No.
49014/16/89-Estt.(C) dated 16.7.1990 laid down
certain guidelines. In the year 1990 as a one time
measure, Government decided to allow age relaxation
etc. for the purpose of recruitment. Paragraph 6 of the
O.M. says that the relaxation given to the casual
workers will be available only for next examination to
be conducted by the Staff Selection Commission for
the recruitment to the posts of LDCs and
Stenographers. It will be the responsibility of the
administrative Ministries/Departments, where the
casual worker is employed at the time of issue of
these instructions to ensure that the casual workers
intending to appear in the relevant examination
conducted by the Staff Selection Commission satisfy
all the conditions prescribed in the O.M. Paragraph JO
relevant for our purpose is as follows: "It is once again
reiterated that there is a complete ban on engagement
of casual workers for performing duties of Group 'C
posts and hence no appointment of casual worker
should be made in future for performing duties of
Group 'C posts. If any deviation in this regard is
committed, the administrative officer incharge, in the
rank ofJoint Secretary or equivalentwill be held
responsible for the same", (emphasis added). It is after
this Government of order of 1990, the Casual
Labourers (Grant of Temporary Status and
OA No.1392 of 2016

Regularisation) Scheme of Government of India 1993
came into being. As per the 1993 Scheme casual
workers who are given temporary status are permitted
to be regularised to Group 'D' posts only.
Therefore, it
is not open to the second respondent to take a policy
decision to hold an examination through LDCE
intended only for permanent Government servants of
the Central Government viz. Group 'D'. It is nothing but
bypassing the statutory rules and the Government of
India instructions. It will be permiting back door entry
of casual employees to Group 'C service detrimental to
efficiency of service and breed seeds of corruption and
nepotism (vide judgment in
State of H.P. v. Suresh
Kumar Verma
of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
referred
to above
).

16 & 17. Regularisation of Casual employees in
permanent service requires a policy decision of the
Government since there may be thousands or more in
various departments of Government, Railways, Postal
Services throughout the country. A decision cannot be
taken in isolation without considering the implications
of service and financial commitment.

18. Hence, we have no hesitation to hold that the
proposed action of the respondents is clearly illegal
and arbitrary and the applicants have made out a
case for grant of the relief sought for in this O.A. We
allow the O.A. accordingly. No order as to costs.

xxxxxx

21. Before parting with the case we are constrained to
express our concern at the conflicting stand taken by
the second respondent in reference to regularising the
services of casual employees with temporary status.
The second respondent has pressed into service the
internal communication of the Department to address
the arguments which is as a matter of fact giving up
the stand taken in O.A, 73 of 2005. When we have
declined to look into the internal correspondence of the
Department especially the letter dated 9.8.2005 to
take a different stand in O.A. 73 of 2005 a different
Counsel Mr. M.T. Arunan representing O.A. No. 702
has included this correspondence along with the reply
statement. The reply is consciously silent as to the
stand of the first respondent. Thus it is seen that the
consistent stand of the Union of India in reference to
regularisation is sought to be given a go bye in their
reply. We are unable to accept the case of the
respondent for the reasons set out above. However,
we are constrained to observe that when the
Departmental Heads are taking a stand it can never
be contrary to the Government of India's stand. It has
OA No.1392 of 2016

rightly been observed that guidelines are being
observed more in breach than their implementation.
More often than not the administrative authorities and
in disregard to the guidelines, thereby affording the
employees unintended opportunities to seek
regularisation of their services through Courts and
Tribunals etc. In spite of warning that disciplinary
action will be taken, that has not resulted in the
desired effect. We feel that this is an appropriate case
for the first respondent to take appropriate action
against officers concerned and to issue suitable
guidelines to the Counsels representing the cases
before the Tribunal. Copies of this order shall be
communicated to the first respondent and to the
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions, Govt. of India, New Delhi directly by the
Registry."

6.4 Thereafter, vide Office Order dated 21.7.2008, the

applicant was promoted as LDC pursuant to above

examination under 25% quota, persons eligible are Group 'D'

employees with 5 years of regular service in their grade

rendered after appointment, the said office Order is

reproduced as under:-

"Consequent upon the promotion of Shri Giriraj Sharma,
Daftry, to the post of LDC (Grade VII) of Central Passport
Organization in Regional Passport Office, Delhi, with effect
from 09.07.2008 (FN) vide Ministry‟s Office Order
No.V.IV/578/2/2006 dated 10th July, 2008, on the basis
of the result of Limited Departmental Examination held on
20.05.2006, his pay has been fixed at Rs.3575/- in the
pay scale of Rs.3050-75-3950-80-4590, as under:-

Existing Basic Pay raised by Pay fixed on Date of next
Pay in the pay adding one promotion to increment
scale of Rs.2610- notional the post of (subject to
60-3150-65-3540 increment in LDC w.e.f. passing
the lower post 09.07.2008 typewriting
or Rs.100/- test)
whichever is
more w.e.f.

09.07.2008
OA No.1392 of 2016

Rs.3410/- Rs.3510/- Rs.3575 01.07.2009

6.5 The applicant preferred an RTI dated 16.7.2009

seeking following information:-

"I appeal to you to kindly provide me the following
information under
RTI Act
, Postal Order of Rs.Ten only
bearing number 77E 335421 dated 15.07.2009 is
enclosed.

(i) Services of Casual employees engaged in
Passport Offices, Cochin, Trivandrum and
Kozhikode were regularized and after
regularization of their services, some of them
approached hon'ble C‟T in accordance to the
directives of CAT Ernakulam, date of their
regular appointment was changed to the initial
date of engagement as casual employee. The
pay was re-fixed also and arrears was
disbursed. Accordingly some other employees
who did not file petition in CAT, approached CPV
division to give them similar benefit also and
many of them were given the same benefits. But
this benefit has not been given to similarly
placed employees in Delhi. It is requested to
provide me the information as below:

(a) Number of employees whose date of regular
appointment was changed/shifted to the date
of initial engagement as casual employees
and their pay was re-fixed and arrears was
also disbursed in accordance to directives of
CAT, Ernakulam, may please be informed
office wise.

(b) Number of employees whose did not
approach CAT and their date of regular
appointment was changed/shifted to the date
of initial engagement as casual employees
and their pay was re-fixed and arrears was
also disburse in accordance to directives of
CPV Division, may please be informed office
wise.

(c) Number of employees whose date of regular
appointment was changed/shifted to the date
of initial engagement as casual employees
and their pay was re-fixed and arrears was
also disbursed and seniority was also given
from the date of their initial engagement as
casual employee in accordance to directives
OA No.1392 of 2016

of CAT, Ernakulam, may please be informed
office wise."

6.6 The respondent responded to RTI application vide

Communication dated 13.8.2009, which reads as under:-

"Please refer to you RTI application dated 15.07.09
asking some information. The information is as follows:-

S. Name of Q.No.(a) Q.No.(b) Q.No.(c)
Passport Office
No.

1 COCHIN NIL 48 NIL

2 KOZHIKODE 16 NIL NIL

3 TRIVANDRUM 30 ONE ONE

2. In case, you are not satisfied with the above, you
may file an appeal with the Joint Secretary (CPV) & First
Appellate authority, Ministry of External Affairs, Patiala
House annexe, Tilak Marg, New Delhi - 110 001 within
30 days of receipt of this letter by you."

6.7 Thereafter, the applicant preferred a representation

dated 22.10.2009, which is reproduced herein below:-

"With due regard I would like to place the following for
your kind and sympathetic consideration:-

1. I was appointed as casual employee on 14.06.1989
and my services were regularized w.e.f. 15.03.2004.

2. Sir, in accordance to the information given to me vide
letter number VRTI/551/259/09 dated 13.08.2009,
(A) there are 16 employees in Passport Office,
Kozhikode and 30 in Passport Office, Trivandrum
whose date of regular appointment has been shifted to
the date of initial engagement as casual employees
and their pay has also been re-fixed and arrears
disbursed in accordance to directives of CAT,
Ernakulam. (B). There are 48 employees in Passport
Office, Cochin and one in Passport Office, Trivandrum
who did not approach CAT and their date of regular
appointment has been shifted to the date of their
OA No.1392 of 2016

initial engagement as casual employee by your Office
and their pay has been re-fixed and arrears
disbursed. (C) There are employees whose date of
regular appointment has been shifted to the date of
initial engagement as casual employee and their has
been re-fixed and arrear also disbursed and seniority
has also been given from the date of their initial
engagement as casual employee in accordance to
directives of CAT, Ernakulam. According to
information furnished in reply to RTI question the
number of such employees who have been given
benefit of seniority also, has been stated as one
whereas according to my information the number of
such employees is more then one.

In view of facts explained above, it is kindly requested
to shift date of my regular appointment from
15.03.2004 to 14.06.1989 and to re-fix my pay and
also disburse the arrears along-with seniority as has
been done in cases of my counter parts as stated
above.

Yours faithfully,
Sd/-

(Giriraj Sharma)
Lower Division Clerk
RPO, Delhi
22.10.2009"

6.8 The said representation was not responded to by the

respondents.

6.9 In the aforesaid context, what is to be observed that

the applicant is seeking regularisation of service from the

date of his initial appointment as casual labourer w.e.f

14.6.1989 for counting of his casual service.

6.10 The Hon‟ble Apex Court in case of
Registrar

General of India & Ors. vs V. Thippa Setty And Ors
.

[(1998) 8 SCC 690], held as under:-

"Ordinarily the regularisation must take effect
prospectively and not retrospectively. It must also
be borne in mind that ad hoc appointees, casual
OA No.1392 of 2016

labour and daily-rated persons are not subject to
strict discipline of service and it is a matter of
common experience that their attendance is very
often not regular and at times they do not even
meet the qualification for appointment since they
are taken on ad hoc basis. These deficiencies are
overlooked by way of granting of relaxation and,
therefore, care must be taken to see that they do
not upset the seniorities of regular appointees.
Whether they qualify in a given case or not is not
relevant but what is relevant is that regularisation
should be prospective and not retrospective as the
chances of their upsetting the seniorities cannot be
overlooked."

6.11 The Full Bench of this Tribunal at Ernakulam in

O.A.Nos.75/2010, 82/2010 & 196/2010 in
Smt. K. U.

Sobhana
(supra) where all the above O.As came before the

Full Bench on a reference made by the Division Bench,

finding that the order in O.A.82/08 was in conflict with the

order in O.A.1557/98 on the question as to whether the

casual employees subsequently regularized were entitled

for seniority reckoned from the date of their initial

appointment or not and held as under:-

"13.
In
Rabindra Nath Bose and others vs.
Union of India and others
; AIR 1970 SC 470,
the Apex Court declared that it is settled
that
Article 13
of the Constitution has no
retrospective effect and therefore, any action taken
before the commencement of the Constitution in
pursuance of the provisions of any law which was
a valid law at the time when such action was
taken cannot be challenged and the law under
which such action was taken cannot be
questioned as unconstitutional and void on the
score of its infringing the fundamental rights
enshrined in Part III of the Constitution.

In
Usha
Devi v. State of Kerala
;2002 (1) KLT 615, it was
observed by the Hon'ble High Court of Kerala that
rank list cannot be challenged after it had become
OA No.1392 of 2016

final and after a long delay and unsettle the
settled position for years.

14. The applicants in O.A.196/10 joined the
service on regular basis after following the regular
selection process as early as in 1982,
subsequently got promoted to the next higher
cadre as UDC in 1992,1994 and 1996 respectively
and again promoted as Assistants and
Superintendents. Thus, by virtue of their seniority
which they enjoyed for a long period and having
been promoted successfully to the next higher post
from time to time, cannot be upset by conferring
seniority on the casual employees not regularly
recruited after following the same procedure as
was applicable to the regular recruitment and to
have a march over the regularly recruited
employees. Therefore, even though they had been
in service as casual employees they are entitled
for all the other benefits other than seniority. The
casual employees as of right could claim seniority
only when they became qualified by successfully
passing in the examination. Their retrospective
regularization is good enough for all purposes
other than seniority. Accordingly, we answer the
issue as follows:-

15. The casual employees are entitled to be
regularized with effect from their initial
engagement and will be entitled for all other
consequential benefits other than seniority and
monetary benefit.

16. The Division Bench while considering the
matter before reference have already held that the
O.A. is maintenable. In the circumstances based
on the answer as given above we allow this O.A.
and quash Annexure A1 to the extent it directed
that the party respondents who are the applicants
in O.A.Nos. 297,299 & 300 of 2008 are entitled to
higher promotion based on the revised seniority.

We declare that the party respondents are not
entitled for seniority from the date of their initial
engagement as casual employees over the
applicants. In the light of the reference answered,
we declare that the applicants in O.A. No.75/2010
and O.A.No.82 /2010 are not entitled to claim
seniority as LDC with effect from date of their
initial entry into the service on casual basis.
O.A.No.75/10 is dismissed. As regards the reliefs
sought for in O.A No.82/10 is concerned, the
reliefs sought for to revise seniority in the category
of LDC from the date of initial appointment and to
pay the arrears of salary from the date of initial
engagement, are dismissed. However, the
applicants will be entitled for all other
OA No.1392 of 2016

consequential benefits other than seniority and
monetary benefits, as was given to the applicants
in O.A.No.1557/08, if not already granted."

6.12 We have been informed that the above Full Bench

decision has been implemented in letter and spirit by the

respondents.

6.13 It is also noticeble that even before the decision of

the Full Bench, the Judgment dated 14.7.2003 and

judgment dated 13.6.2005 were implemented vide Office

Order dated 23.09.2005 by the respondents, the same is

reproduced as under:-

"In pursuance of CAT (Ernakulam Bench)‟s judgment
dated 14.07.2003 in OA No.1557/98 & OA No.436/2005 dataed
13.06.2005 Smt. K.U. Shobhana is appointed as a Lower
Division Clerk in Regional Passport Office, Cochin in the Central
Passport Organization of the Ministry of External Affairs in the
pay scale of Rs.3050-75-3950-80-4590/- in temporary capacity
with effect from 25.09.1989 i.e. from the date of her initial
engagement as casual labourer.

Smt. K.U. Shobhana will be entitled to all consequential
benefits such as „notional‟ fixation of pay, eligibility to appear in
any test or examination if held for her promotion to the next
higher grade, counting of qualifying service for termination
benefits from 25.09.1989 except seniority in the Grade of LDC
which will be counted from 06.10.1994 only."

6.14 Even daily rated clerks were extended the benefits of

decisions rendered by the Full Bench decision ( Supra),

which re reproduced as under :-

"In pursuance of Hon‟ble CAT Ernakulam Bench Order
dated 09-12-2008 in OA No.297/2008 & 300/2008 and
in compliance with observations of Hon‟ble High Court of
OA No.1392 of 2016

Kerala in WP(C) No.21024/09 filed by Shri Neelakanta
Iyer and others and in WP(C) No.15201/09 filed by Smt.
Ansamma Abraham and others against Hon‟ble
Tribunal‟s orders and also in accordance with orders of
larger bench of this Tribunal in OA Nos.75/2010,
82/2010 and 196/2010, the pay of following officials of
this office are fixed from the date of their initial
engagement as Daily Rated Clerks.

Sl.No. Name Date of initial engagement

1. Smt. V.Anitha, Assistant 03-08-1992

2. Smt. P Sudha Bai, Superintendent 19-03-1982

Consequently, these 2 officials are entitled to
notional fixation of pay from the date of their initial
engagement and all other consequential benefits other
than Seniority and monetary benefits."

6.15 In view the above proposition of law
laid down by
the

Hon‟ble Apex Court, the applicant cannot claim seniority.

6.16 Having due regard to the peculiar facts of the case

and also in light of Full Bench decision in
K.U.Sobhana

(supra), it is not disputed that the applicant was granted

temporary status under 1993 Scheme like others w.e.f

15.03.1994. The applicant was regularized vide

communication dated 15.3.2004 to the post of Group "D‟

Watchman. For purpose of regularisation, it appears that

the only pre-condition was to qualify a Special Examination

under 25% quota, persons eligible are Group 'D' employees

with 5 years of regular service in their grade rendered after

appointment (which the applicant qualified in the year

2005). Thereafter, once the applicant had qualified the
OA No.1392 of 2016

said examination, he ought to have been extended the

benefit of regularization from the date of his initial

engagement with similarly situated persons irrespective of

category either Group "C" or Group "D" inasmuch as even

though the others, who qualified the examination in year

1993 and 1997, they were regularized from initial date of

engagement subject to the conditions that said persons

including the applicant shall only be entitled to for all other

consequential benefits on notional basis other than

seniority and monetary benefits. The 1993 Scheme itself

envisaged for counting of past services as evident from the

clause 5 (v) ie 50% of the service rendered under

temporary status would be counted for the purpose of

retirement benefits after their regularization. It is also

borne out from the records that vide Office Order dated

23.9.2005 (casual labourer at page 25 of written

submissions) and Office Order (date illegible at page 40 of

written submissions) Daily Rated Clerks were extended

similar benefits without any distinction.

6.17 This issue is no more res integra in view of the

decision of the Full Bench of this Tribunal in identical

matters titled as Smt. K.U. Sobhana & Ors. vs. UOI &

Ors. [OA No.75/2010 and batch matter decided by a
OA No.1392 of 2016

common order dated 12.08.2011] wherein the question

under reference has been categorically answered as under:-

"15. The casual employees are entitled to be
regularized with effect from their initial engagement and
will be entitled for all other consequential benefits other
than seniority and monetary benefits".

6.18 It is also noticed that in an identical case in V.

Srinivas & Ors. vs. Union of India & Ors. [OA

No.174/2012 decided by the Hyderabad Bench of this

Tribunal on 25.08.2014], wherein the applicants, who had

been appointed as casual labourers between 1985 and

1997, subsequently regularized as Group-D employees, and

further promoted as LDC during 2002 to 2007, sought

regularization from the date of their initial engagement on

the strength of the order passed by the Ernakulam Bench

in OA No.758/2007 and OA No.32/2008, which were

clubbed together and decided by a common order dated

15.01.2009 directing the respondents to regularize their

services w.e.f. their respective dates of appointment as

casual labourers with consequential benefits including

arrears of pay except seniority in the cadre of LDC.
The

said decision was challenged before the Hon‟ble High Court

of Kerala in WP(C) No.23813/2009 and 26263/2009 and

the same were dismissed vide judgment dated 28.06.2010

relying upon the decision of the Hon‟ble Apex Court in
UP
OA No.1392 of 2016

State Electricity Board vs. Pooran Chandra Pandey &

Ors.
[2007 (
1) SCC 92] and Secretary, State of

Karanataka & Ors vs. Umadevi & Ors.
[2006 (4) SSC 1].

6.19 In compliance of the aforesaid decision, the

applicants therein had also been granted the benefit of

regularization of services with effect from their date of

initial engagement as casual labourers, including arrears of

pay. Thus, the aforesaid decision of the Ernakulam Bench

as upheld by the Hon‟ble High Court of Kerala and

implemented by the respondents themselves as also the

decision of the Hyderabad Bench in V. Srinivas (supra) are

binding on us. Apart from this, the decision of the Full

Bench of this Tribunal in Smt. K.U. Sobhana (supra) is

also binding on us being Full Bench decision.

6.20 It is noticed that on 13.12.2022, we sought

clarification from the learned counsel for the respondents

on one important point „whether the applicant herein was

initially engaged as Casual Labour in Group-C or Group-D

and similarly in the citations quoted therein whether those

applicants had been engaged initially as Casual Labour in

Group-D or in Group-C. To the said point, learned counsel

for the respondents could not answer the same and sought

further time to check the details with the respondents.
OA No.1392 of 2016

Even on 17.02.2023 on which date the order was reserved,

he could not clarify the aforesaid position.

6.21 In view of the above discussion and the law on the

subject referred to above, we are left with no option but to

allow the claim of the applicant following the decision of the

Full Bench in Smt. K.U. Sobhana (supra), common order

dated 15.01.2019 passed by the Ernakulam Bench in OA

No.758/2007 and OA No.32/2008 upheld by the Hon‟ble

High Court of Kerala, decision of the Ernakulam Bench of

this Tribunal in
Ravindranath V.K. & Ors. vs. UOI &

Ors.
(supra) and A.R. Parameswaran & Ors. vs. UOI &

Ors. (supra).

6.22 In conspectus of the facts and circumstances of the

case, the instant OA is allowed with a direction to the

respondents to regularize the services of the applicant from

the date of his initial engagement as causal labour/worker

for all purposes other than seniority and monetary, namely,

eligibility to appear in the promotion tests or examinations,

and for terminal benefits etc. The respondents are further

directed to issue appropriate orders notionally fixing his

pay and date of regularization accordingly.
OA No.1392 of 2016

6.23 The exercise, as ordained above, shall be completed

by the respondents within a period of three months from

the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.

6.24 No order as to costs.

(Manish Garg) (Anand Mathur)
Member (J) Member (A)
/na/