Central Administrative Tribunal - Delhi

Krishan Kumar vs Sports Authority Of India on 4 November, 2023

(1)

Central Administrative Tribunal
Principal Bench, New Delhi

O.A. No.597/2023
WITH
O.A. No.556/2023
O.A. No.598/2023
O.A. No.655/2023
O.A. No.2288/2021

Reserved on :05.10.2023
Pronounced on :

Hon'ble Mr. R.N. Singh, Member (J)
Hon'ble Mr. Sanjeeva Kumar, Member (A)

O.A. No.597/2023

Dr. Hema Valecha, (Age 36 years)
D/o Sh. Ramesh Kumar
R/o Sanskriti Apartment, H.No.17 & 18,
1st Floor A Tower 3,
K.No.533 and 535 Minimum Extended Buarari Garhi,
Burari Delhi-110084. ...Applicant.
versus

(By Advocate: Shri Sachin Chauhan)

Versus

1. Sports Authority of India,
Through the Director General,
Sports Authority of India,
Jawahar Lal Nehru Stadium Complex (East Gate)
Lodhi Road, New Delhi-110003.

2. National Centre for Sports Science and
Research (NCSSR)
Through its Director,
National Centre for Sports Science and
Research (NCSSR)
Room No.41, Indira Gandhi Stadium,
New Delhi. ...Respondents

(By Advocate: Shri Aruneshwar Gupta, Sr. Advocate assisted
by Shri Harshit Jain and Mr.Varun Dewan)
(2)

O.A. No.556/2023

1. Amandeep Singh,
Working as S&C Expert Grade - II
Aged about 26 years,
S/o-Sukhdev Singh,
R/o #B4-1476 Patti Suja Singh,
Near Chota Talab,
Sri Muktsar Sahib 152026, Punjab.

2. Dr. Chandravijaysinh G Jadeja (PT),
Working as - Physiotherapist Grade - II,
Aged about 37 years,
S/o Girirajsinh D Jadeja,
R/o "GIRIRAJ" Banglow, Jadeshwar Society,
Station Road, Jam khambhaliya 361305,
Dist- Dev Bhoomi Dwarka, Gujarat.

3. Dr. Shailja Kaul (PT)
Working as - Physiotherapist Grade I,
Aged about 37 years, D/o Mr. V.P.Kaul
R/o B-702, Satisar Appartments,
plot no.6, Sector 7, Dwarka, New-Delhi-110075.

4. Dr. Andrea R. Hegde (PT)
Working as- Physiotherapist Grade I,
Aged about 28 years,
S/o Mr. Ramesh M. Hegde
R/o - Permanent address- A/P Kodoli
(Sakharwadi) Tal. Panhala. Dist. Kolhapur.
(Maharashtra - 4161114.

5. Dr. Kanika Taneja (PT)
Working as - Physiotherapist Grade II,
Aged about 37 years,
D/o-Dr. Vinod Kumar
R/o-35/10 Ground Floor
Old Rajender Nagar,
New Delhi-110060.

6. Dr. Bhanu Uday Shandilya (PT)
Working as - Physiotherapist Grade II,
Aged about 40 years,
S/o Shri L.L. Shandilya
R/o-271, Near Noble College,
(3)

Rajakhedi, Makroniya, Sagar,
Madhya Pradesh - 470004.

7. Dr. V.Gayathri Jawahar (PT)
Working as - Physiotherapist Grade I,
Aged about 43 years, D/o-G. Jawahar
R/O-KARA A 31, SARAS,
Alathara Sreekariyam,
P.O Thiruvananthapuram,
Kerala-695017.

8. Dr. Manveet Kumar (PT)
Working as - Physiotherapist Grade I,
Aged about 30 years,
S/o - Raghuvir Singh
R/o - Village - Jamaluddinpur
Post - Dattiyana Tehsil - Chandpur
District - Bijnor Uttar Pradesh - 246725.

9. Dr. Ritu Susan Babu (PT)
Working as - Physiotherapist Grade II,
Aged about 36 years,
D/o - Babu George
R/o - Edayadiyil house, Gaff hills,
Sreekariyam P.O, Trivandrum,
Kerala - 695017.

10. Neha Luthra (PT)
Working as - Physiotherapist Grade I,
Aged about 35 years,
D/o - Sh ML Luthra
R/o 2L-23 NIT Faridabad,
Haryana 121001.

11. Dr. Kriti sachdeva (PT)
Working as Physiotherapist Grade II
Aged about 35 years,
D/O - Mr Deepak Sachdeva
R/O H.no-1697, Sec-49 Sainik Colony
Faridabad, Haryana.

12. Dr. Daniel Raj S (PT)
Working as Physiotherapist Grade I
Aged about 35 Years
S/O - Salaman Raj
R/0 - 6/164 Gandhi Nagar 1st,
(4)

Pulivalam,Thiruvarur,
Tamilnadu 610109

13. Dr. Deepti Rani (PT)
Working as - Physiotherapist Grade 2
Aged about 32 Years
W/O - Antarjot Singh
R/O H.no. 22, Baba Makhan Shah
Lubana Nagar Near Mithapur Road,
Jalandhar City, Punjab 144003.

14. Dr. Rajlaxmi Sawant (PT)
Working as Physiotherapist Grade II
Aged about 33 Years
D/O - PADMAJA SAWANT
R/O - 23 Bhagirathi Puram Engineers Enclave
GMS Road Dehradun 248001

15. DR. Mahesh Babu Bellam (PT)
Working as Physiotherapist Grade II
Aged about 33 years
S/O - Venkata raju
R/O-H.No:5-171/1 K.S palle, Giddalur,
Prakasam, Andhrapradesh- 523357

16. DR. Aditi Nigam (PT)
Working as - Physiotherapist Grade I
Aged about 31 years
D/O - Shri S.K.Nigam
R/O-A-2 First Floor Pushpa Appt 2 plot no 38
Sector 5 Rajendra Nagar
Sahibabad Ghaziabad UP. 201005.

17. DR. Vishal Bhardwaj (PT)
Working as Physiotherapist grade I
Aged about 41 years
S/O R. N. Bhardwaj
R/O-B-83 Double Storey Quaters,
Motia Khan, Pahar Ganj, New Delhi 110055.

18. DR. Ganji Ashoka Chakravarthi (PT)
Working as - PHYSIOTHERAPIST GRADE I
Aged about 33 years
S/O-Ganji Srinivasa Rao,
R/O-6-119, D N T Colony, Gangavaram Road,
Near Community Hall, Inkollu, Prakasm (District),
(5)

Andhra Pradesh-523167.

19. DR. Praveen Trivedi (PT)
Working as - PHYSIOTHERAPIST GRADE I
Aged about 33 years
S/O-Shailendra Kumar Trivedi,
R/O-8/179 Awas Ambedkarpuram Vikas
Kalyanpur, U.P.-208017.

20. DR. Aamir Hussain Shah (PT)
Working as PHYSIOTHERAPIST GRADE I
Aged about 32 years
S/O Gh Rasool Shah
R/O Buchoo Kokernag Anantnag
Jammu & Kashmir.

21. DR. Tsering Droma (PT)
Working as Physiotherapist
Aged about 30 years
S/O Mr. Sonam Tsering
R/O Doma Hotel & Store,
Near Forest Check Gate, Tippi,
West Kameng, Arunachal Pradesh-790114

22. Dr Arun Kumar (Ph.D.)
Working as - Anthropometrist-II
Aged about 31 years
S/O - Kamta Prasad
R/O In front of Moti Bhawan Ardali Bazar
Katra Banda, U.P. 210001

23. Suresh Kumar Sen
Working as - MASSEURE
Aged about 24 years
S/O Durga Lal sen R/O 188, Near Raj. UP. Primary
School, Ashok Nagar, Bara Naya Gaon
Dist. Bundi, Rajasthan - 323024

24. Anshu Malik
Working as Consultant nutritionist
Aged about 47 years
S/O - Shri Om Prakash Malick
R/O House No.1396, Sector 15
Panchkula, Haryana - 134111.

25. Shubhada Yeole
(6)

Working as - Consultant Nutritionist
Aged about 31 years
D/O-C.G. Yeole
R/O-Plot no 47, survey no. 39
Parijat Nagar,
Old Saikheda Road Nashik Road,
Nashik, Maharashtra 422101

26. Harmanvir Singh
Working as - Strength & Conditioning Lead
Aged about 28 years
S/O-Mr. Jasbir Singh
R/O-34, TDI City, Sector 118, SAS Nagar,
Punjab 160055

27. Ramanjit Kaur
Working as - Strength and Conditioning Expert
Grade II
Aged about 33 years
S/O-S. Amarjit Singh
R/O - #342, Ward no 13, Civil Hospital road,
Near Water Works, Mansa, Punjab

28. Bimal Raj
Working as - Strength & Conditioning Expert Grade II
Aged about 25 years
S/O-K Rajendran
R/O-TC 76/994(1), Nandanam SK Lane,
Kallummoodu, Anayara
P.O, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala 695029

29. Akshay V
Working as - Strength and Conditioning Expert Grade II
Aged about 30 years
S/O-Vijayachandran BS
R/O-Thiruvonam, Amritha Nagar,
Kaimanam, Pappanamcode
P.O. Thiruvananthapuram 695018

30. Rijo Oommen Iype
Working as Strength and Conditioning Exper Grade II
Aged about 28 years
S/O-Oommen Iype
R/O Room No 1 Shubham Apartment
Chulna Road Vasai West 401202
(7)

31. Chandrej Kumar Working as - Masseur
Aged about 34 years
S/O Madan Lal
R/O - H. No 27, Street No. 2 Krishna colony,
Nabha Road, Patiala 147001. ...Applicants

(By Advocate: Shri M.K.Bhardwaj)

Versus

1. Sports Authority of India, Through its Director General,
JLN Stadium, Lodhi Road, New Delhi

2. The Secretary, Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports,
Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi. ...Respondents.

(By Advocate: Shri Aruneshwar Gupta, Sr. Advocate assisted
by Shri Harshit Jain and Mr.Varun Dewan)

O.A. No.598/2023

Dr. Kulbir Singh Rana (Age 41 years)
Physiotherapist Grade-II
S/o Sh.Rajpal Singh Rana,
R/o H.No.753, Near Sultan Memorial School,
V.P.O.Ghevra,
North West Delhi-110081. ...Applicant.

(By Advocate: Shri Sachin Chauhan)

Versus

1. Sports Authority of India,
Through the Director General,
Sports Authority of India,
Jawahar Lal Nehru Stadium Complex (East Gate)
Lodhi Road, New Delhi-110003.

2. National Centre for Sports Science and
Research (NCSSR)
Through its Director,
National Centre for Sports Science and
Research (NCSSR)
Room No.41, Indira Gandhi Stadium,
New Delhi. ...Respondents
(8)

(By Advocate: Shri Aruneshwar Gupta, Sr. Advocate assisted
by Shri Harshit Jain and Mr.Varun Dewan)

O.A. No.655/2023

1. Naina Praveen,
Working as Nutritionist
Aged about 48 years,
W/o S Praveen Kumar,
R/O - SAI Takyel, Family Quarters, SAI NERC,
Imphal - 795001.

2. Dr. Alisha,
Working as -Anthropometrist Grade - II,
Aged about 30 years,
W/o-Varun Gandhi
R/o - RZ-344/C, street no. 7, Sadh Nagar,
Palam Colony, Delhi-110045

3. Aby. R. Thomas
Working as - Strength & conditioning Expert
Grade II,
Aged about 25 years,
S/o Mr. Regi Thomas
R/o 9B Indrani Street, Ashok Nagar Extension,
Avadi, Chennai-600062

4. Ms. Anumol K
Working as-Physiologist Grade II,
Aged about 30 years,
W/o - Anjoe Jose
R/o - Beena Bhawan, Moozhinada, Karyavattom,
Trivandrum - 695584

5. Ashwani
Working as - Strength & conditioning Expert
Lead
Aged about 26 years,
D/o - Parthasarathy
R / 0 - 2 , Vijayalaxmi Nagar, Puthagaram,
Chennai - 600099

6. Dr. Sunil Kumar
Working as - Consultant Doctor,
Aged about 35 years,
(9)

S/o Shri Jagdish Kumar
R / 0 - 132/28 B, Subhash Nagar,
Near Shiv Mandir, Rohtak - 124001.

7. Dr. Shilpa Choudhary
Working as - Anthropometrist Grade-II,
Aged about 34 years,
W /o - Nishant Parmar
R / 0 - Sunil Vinayak CHS Flat No. 2,
Plot No. 310,Sector-19C,
Kopar Khairne, Mumbai - 400709

8. Ms. Shivangi
Working as - Masseuse,
Aged about 25 years,
D/o - Haribhan Singh
R/o - Village Dhanpur, Amethi,
Uttar Pradesh - 227801.

9. Dr. Simmi Saini
Working as - Anthropometrist Grade I,
Aged about 30 years,
D / o - Narender Kumar
R / o - 1609 , Sector - 46, Gurugram,
Haryana-122003

10. Anirban Das
Working as - Strength & Conditioning Expert
(Grade II)
Age about 31 years
S/o-Shri Krishna Gopal Das
Ro-Smantapally, Ruparayanpur 13,
Mother Teresa Sarani,
P.O.Rupanarayanpur Bazar,
Distt. Paschim Bardhanman,
West Bengal -713364

11. Soumyadip Ghosh
Working as-Exercise Physiologist Grade II
Aged about 26 years,
S/O-Shri Debi Prasad Ghosh
RO-Aligunj, Ward No. 11, Near Krishna Lodge,
Midnapore, PS-Kotwail, Paschim Medinapore,
West Bengal - 721101.

12. Sounak Chakraborty
(10)

Working as-Exercise Physiologist Grade I
Aged about 27 Years
S/o - Shri Udayaditya Chakraborty
RO-P-46/C, Motijheel Avenue,
Kolkata - 700074 P.O.Motijheel, PS Dumdum

13. Sourojeet Samanta
Working as-Exercise Physiologist Grade I
Aged about 26 Years
S/O Shri Supriyo Samanta
R/o 7/1B, Ramkrishna Das Lane,
Kolkata - 700009.

14. Dr. Sukhmani Kaur
Working as-Anthropometrist Grade-I
Aged about 30 Years
D/o Shri Harpal Singh
R/o 75, Water Works Wazirabad, P.O.
Timarpur, Delhi-110054.

15. Ms. Sweta Sarkar
Working as - Assistant Nutritionist
Aged about 31 years
S/O - Prabir Ranjan Sarkar
R/O-61/C, Subhash Nagar, Talpukur,
Rishra, Hooghly - 712250, West Bengal

16. Ms. Usra Hasan
Working as - Exercise Physiologist Grade-II
Aged about 26 years
D/O - Shri Iqbal hasan
R/O-F.A.-39, Abul Fazal Enclave-1,
Jamia Nagar, Okhla, New Delhi-110025

17. Ms. Harmeet Kaur
Working as - Masseuse
Aged about 34 years
W/O - Amarjit Singh
R/O - Quarter 17, Type 2, Near Girls Hostel,
NSNIS Patiala, Punjab - 147001

18. Ms. Manidipa Dawn
Working as - Exercise Physiologist Grade - III
Aged about 29 years
D/O - Tamal Dawn,
R/O-3, Nather Bagan Street, Kolkata - 700005
(11)

19. Ms. Priya Tiwari
Working as - Exercise Physiologist Grade-II
Aged about 28 years
D/O - Shri Krishan Kumar
R/o H.No. - 248, Near Jain Temple,
Indra Nagar, Kishangarh, Ajmer,
Rajasthan - 305801.

20. Anish V.
Working as - Masseur
Aged about 35 years
S/O-Vijayan
R/O-3/176, Dr. Ambedkar Nagar,
New Delhi-110062

21. Pradeep K.
Working as - Masseur
S/O-Vasu
Aged about 36 years
R/O-19/538, First Floor,
DDA Flats, Madan Gir Khanpur Road,
Delhi-110062 ...Applicants

(By Advocate: Shri M.K.Bhardwaj)

Versus
1. Sports Authority of India,
Through its Director General,
JLN Stadium, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi.

2. The Director (P),
Sports Authority of India,
Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports,
JLN Stadium, Lodhi Road, New Delhi. ...Respondents

(By Advocate: Shri Aruneshwar Gupta, Sr. Advocate assisted
by Shri Harshit Jain and Mr.Varun Dewan)

O.A. No.2288/2021

1.Krishan Kumar, Working as Coach, Group 'C'
Aged about 31 years,
S/o Sh. Om Prakash,
R/o VPO Chamar Khera,
(12)

Distt Hisaar, Haryana 125113.

2.Sudhir Dehiya, Working as Coach, Group 'C'
S/o Sh.R.C.Dahiya,
R/o 127, West Krishan Vihar,
Najafgarh, New Delhi-110043.

3.Rajesh Kumar, Working as Coach, Group 'C'
S/o Sh.Satpal,
R/o VPO Kawi, Panipat, Haryana 132113.

4.Rupinder Punia, Working as Coach, Group 'C'
S/o Sh.Mahender Singh,
R/o Shop No.4A, New Anaj Mandi,
Distt Rohtak, Haryana 124001.

5.Yogesh Kumar, Working as Coach, Group 'C'
Aged about 30 years,
S/o Sh.Laxman Singh,
R/o Makkan No.521, DC Colony,
Near BTM Meal, Hanuman Mandir,
Bhiwani, Haryana 127021.

6.Pardeep, Working as Coach, Group 'C'
Aged about 30 years,
S/o Sh. Anand Singh,
R/o Officer Colony, H no.234
Type-2, Rohtak, Haryana 121001.

7.Vikram, Working as Coach, Group 'C'
Aged about 30 years,
S/o Sh.Satbir Singh,
R/o VPO Umra,
Distt Hisaar, Haryana 125033.

8.Amit, Working as Coach, Group 'C'
Aged about 32 years,
S/o Sh.Rajkumar,
R/o VPO, Baroda,
Distt Jind, Haryana 126115. ....Applicants
(By Advocate: Shri M.K.Bhardwaj)
Versus
1. Sports Authority of India,
Through its Director General,
Sports Authority of India,
JLN Stadium, Lodhi Road,
(13)

New Delhi.

2. The Secretary,
Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports,
Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi. ...Respondents
(By Advocate: Shri Aruneshwar Gupta, Sr. Advocate assisted
by Shri Harshit Jain and Mr.Varun Dewan)

ORDER

Hon'ble Mr. Sanjeeva Kumar, Member (A):

Though the above-mentioned OAs, which were filed

jointly vide this Tribunal's order dated 22.02.2023 as it was

submitted that all the applicants were similarly placed and

they have raised the similar issue in theses OAs filed under

Section 19
of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985, the

applicants have sought the following reliefs and interim relief:

OA No.597/2023

Relief
a. To quash and set aside circular dated 9.2.2023
whereby the contract of the applicant will be concluded
after 1 month i.e. 8.3.2023 and the applicant would be
laid off and to further declare the action of respondents
in replacing the services of applicant by appointing
another set of contractual employees as per impugned
advertisements, as illegal, arbitrary and unjustified and
direct the respondents to continue the service of
applicant till the regularization or appointment of
regularly recruited as Physiotherapist.
b. To quash and set aside Advertisement dated 5.8.2022
and advertisement dated 12.9.2022 and to further direct
the respondent that to formulate a policy to regularize
the services of applicant as Physiotherapist and
applicant be allowed to continue as a Physiotherapist on
contract basis with all consequential benefits in
preference to juniors, outsiders and freshers.

(14)

c. To further direct the respondents that only the
nomenclature of Physiotherapists is being changed as a
High Performance Analyst (HPA)-Physiotherapists so the
applicant is entitled for increase in remuneration as
assigned to the new nomenclature of Post i.e.
Rs.1,05,000/- with all consequential benefits.
d. To allow the OA with exemplary cost.
e. To pass any such other order as this Hon'ble Tribunal
may deem fit and proper in the facts and circumstances
of the case.

Interim Relief
Pending final adjudication of the OA, it is humbly prayed
that this Hon'ble Tribunal may be pleased to restrain the
respondents from terminating the services of applicant
and issue directions to allow the applicant to continue as
Physiotherapist in Sports Authority of India. In case, the
applicant interest are not protected, she would suffer
irreparable loss as the respondents have already taken
decision to terminate her services and appoint another
set of employees on contract basis.

OA No.556/2023

Relief

(i) To quash and set aside the impugned Circular dated
09.02.2023, office order dated 10-14.02.2023 &
advertisements (Annexure A-3 Colly) and direct the
respondents to formulate a policy to regularize the
services of applicants as Scientific Staff/ Physiotherapist,
Nutritionist, Strength & Conditioning Expert,
Anthropometrist & Masseur.

(ii) To declare the action of respondents in replacing the
services of applicants by appointing another set of
contractual employees as per impugned advertisements,
as illegal, arbitrary and unjustified and direct the
respondents to continue the services of applicants
appointment till their regularization of regularly recruited
or as Scientific Staff/ Physiotherapist, Nutritionist,
Expert, Anthropometrist & Masseur.

(iii) to direct the respondents to continue the applicants
as Staff/ Physiotherapist, Nutritionist, Strength
Conditioning Expert, Anthropometrist Masseur on

(15)

contract consequential benefits basis with & & all in
preference to juniors, outsiders and freshers.

(iv) To allow the OA with exemplary costs.

(v) To pass any such other order as this Hon'ble Tribunal
may deem fit and proper in the facts and circumstances
of the case.

Interim Relief
Pending final adjudication of the OA, it is humbly prayed
that this Hon'ble Tribunal may be pleased to restrain the
respondents from terminating the services of applicant
and issue directions to allow the applicants to continue
as Scientific Staff/ Physiotherapist, Nutritionist, Strength
& Conditioning Expert, Anthropometrist & Masseur,
Sports authority of India. In case, the applicants interest
are not protected, they would suffer irreparable loss as
the respondents have already taken decision to
terminate their services and appoint another set of
employees on contract basis.

O.A. No.598/2023

Relief
a. To quash and set aside circular dated 9.2.2023
whereby the contract of the applicant will be concluded
after 1 month i.e. 8.3.2023 and the applicant would be
laid off and to further declare the action of respondents
in replacing the services of applicant by appointing
another set of contractual employees as per impugned
advertisements, as illegal, arbitrary and unjustified and
direct the respondents to continue the service of
applicant till the regularization or appointment of
regularly recruited as Physiotherapist.

b. To quash and set aside Advertisement dated 5.8.2022
and advertisement dated 12.9.2022 and to further direct
the respondent that to formulate a policy to regularize
the services of applicant as Physiotherapist and
applicant be allowed to continue as a Physiotherapist on
contract basis with all consequential benefits in
preference to junior, outsider and fresher.

c. To further direct the respondents that only the
nomenclature of Physiotherapists is being changed as a
High Performance Analyst (HPA)-Physiotherapists so the

(16)

applicant is entitled for the new nomenclature of Post
i.e. Rs. 1,05,000- with all consequential benefits.

d. To allow the OA with exemplary cost.

e. To pass any such other order as this Hon'ble Tribunal
deem fit and proper in the facts and circumstances of
the case.

Interim Relief

Pending final adjudication of the OA, it is humbly prayed
that this Hon'ble Tribunal may be pleased to restrain the
respondents from terminating the services of applicant
and issue directions to allow the applicant to continue as
Physiotherapist in Sports Authority of India. In case, the
applicant interest are not protected, she would suffer
irreparable loss as the respondents have already taken
decision to terminate her services and appoint another
set of employees on contract basis.

O.A. No.655/2023

Relief

(i) To quash and set aside the impugned Circular dated
09.02.2023, office order dated 10.02.2023 &
advertisements (Annexure A-3 Colly) and direct the
respondents to formulate a policy to regularize the
services of applicants as Scientific Staff/ Nutritionist, &
Expert, Strength & Conditioning Anthropometrist,
Exercise Physiologist, Medical Consultant & Masseur.

(ii) To declare the action of respondents in replacing the
services of applicants by appointing another set of
contractual employees as per impugned advertisements,
as illegal, arbitrary and unjustified and direct the
respondents to continue the services of applicants till
their regularization appointment of regularly recruited
Scientific Staff/ Nutritionist, Strength Conditioning
Expert, or as & Anthropometrist, Exercise Physiologist,
Medical Consultant & Masseur.

(iii) to direct the respondents to continue the applicants
as Scientific Staff/ Nutritionist, Strength &
Anthropometrist, Conditioning Exercise Expert,

(17)

Physiologist, Medical Consultant & Masseur on contract
basis with all consequential benefits in preference to
juniors, outsiders and freshers.

(iv) To allow the OA with exemplary costs.

(v) To pass any such other order as this Hon'ble Tribunal
may deem fit and proper in the facts and circumstances
of the case.

Interim Relief
Pending final adjudication of the OA, it is humbly prayed
that this Hon'ble Tribunal may be pleased to stay the
termination circular dated 09.02.2023 and restrain the
respondents from terminating the services of applicant
and issue directions to allow the applicants to continue
as Scientific Staff/ Nutritionist, Strength & Conditioning
Expert, Anthropometrist, Exercise Physiologist, Medical
Consultant & Masseur, Sports authority of India. In case,
the applicants interest are not protected, they would
suffer irreparable loss as the respondents have already
taken decision to terminate their services and appoint
another set of employees on contract basis. The
identically placed persons aggrieved by the same order
have already been given interim protection by this
Hon'ble dated 24.02.2023 in OA No. 556/2023 and vide
order dated 27.02.2023 in other two similar OAs.

O.A. No.2288/2021

Relief

(i) To quash and set aside the impugned Advertisement
(Annexure A-1) and direct the respondents to formulate
a policy to regularize the services of applicants as
Assistant Coach.

(ii) To declare the action of respondents in replacing the
services of applicants by appointing another set of
contractual employees as per advertisement (Annexure
A-1), as illegal, arbitrary and unjustified and direct the
respondents to continue the services of applicants till
their regularization or appointment of regularly recruited
as Assistant Coach.

(18)

(iii) to direct the respondents to continue the applicants
as Assistant Coach on contract basis with all
consequential benefits in preference to juniors, outsiders
and freshers.

(iv) To allow the OA with exemplary costs.

(v) To pass any such other order as this Hon'ble Tribunal
may deem fit and proper in the facts and circumstances
of the case.

Interim Relief

Pending final adjudication of the OA, it is humbly prayed
that this Hon'ble Tribunal may be pleased to stay the
impugned selection process initiated vide Annexure A-1
and direct the respondents to allow the applicants to
continue as Assistant Coach, Sports authority of India.
In case, the applicants interest are not protected, they
would suffer irreparable loss as the respondents have
already taken decision to terminate their services and
appoint another set of employees on contract basis.

2. It will be recalled that the matter was heard at length

in the context of prayer for interim relief and this Bench of

the Tribunal had passed the following order dated

24.02.2023 in OA No.556/2023:

"After notice, matter is listed today for consideration
on applicants' prayer for grant of interim relief. The
applicants have sought interim relief in the form of
restraining the respondents from terminating the
contractual services of the applicants and further to
direct the respondents to allow the applicants to
continue in their present contractual status under
them till disposal of the OA.

Though, no reply/short reply has been filed, however,
as the matter is listed today for consideration of the
applicant's prayer for grant of interim relied, with the
consent of learned counsels for the parties, the matter
is taken up.

(19)

It is the case of the applicants that pursuant to an
advertisement issued by the respondents, the
applicants participated in the selection process for
contractual engagement under the respondents and on
being found suitable and eligible for the respective
posts, the applicants were engaged by the Competent
Authority amongst the respondents and since, then
they have been working and performing under the
respondents to the entire satisfaction of the
Competent Authority. However, during their such
employment, the respondents have started a fresh
selection process to fill up the posts against which the
applicants had already been working on contract and
they were confident of their fresh selection process,
they have also applied. However, the applicants have
been declared unsuccessful in the said selection
process.

Learned counsel for the applicants has argued that
once the applicants have been selected and engaged
on contract basis and their contract still exists, there
was no requirement to conduct a fresh selection
process for filling up the posts against which the
applicants have been working and performing to the
entire satisfaction of the respondents. However, they
have been declared fail in the second selection process
only to ensure that the respondents can be able to
replace the applicants by another set of contractual
employees.

In this background, the applicants have challenged the
circular dated 09.02.2023 (Annexure A/1) and also the
advertisement dated 14.02.2023 to the extend the
same pertains to the applicants.

Learned counsel for the applicants submits that the
action of the respondents in attempting to replace one
set of contractual employees by another set of
contractual employees is contrary to the law laid down
by the Hon'ble Apex Court, which have been followed
by the Hon'ble High Court and also this Tribunal in a
catena of cases and recently, by this Tribunal in order
dated 05.03.2021 in OA No. 2112/2020, titled Ashok
Kumar and Ors. V/s Govt. of NCT of Delhi (Annexure
A-9). He has also placed reliance upon certain interim
orders passed by this Tribunal to contain that in such
facts and circumstances, the applicants are entitled for

(20)

grant of interim relief. He has submitted that the
applicants are engaged by the Competent Authority
after following the due process of selection process
and the performance of the applicants have been
certified by the Competent Authority amongst the
respondents to be satisfactory and even the
Competent Authority has recommended the extension
of the contract and also amount of increment to be
accorded to the applicants. As such the action of the
respondents in disengaging the applicants is illegal and
arbitrary.

On the other hand, learned counsel for the
respondents have vehemently opposed the prayer of
the applicants for grant of any interim relief. Learned
counsel for the respondents has not disputed that the
applicants were engaged on contract basis by the
Competent Authority through a due selection process
and they have been working as such under the
respondents till date. However, the learned counsel for
the respondents have invited our attention to the offer
of contractual engagement dated 26.02.2021 (page

190) to contend that though the initial contract was for
three years i.e. likely to end by 25.02.2024 and the
said contract was also extendable, however as per
para 4 (ii) of the said order dated 26.02.2021,
performance of the applicants were to be reviewed
periodically and if the performance is not found up to
mark, the tenure is liable to be terminated without
assigning any reason after serving one month of
advance notice or one month's remuneration in lieu
thereof.

Learned counsels for the respondents has argued that
in the present case, the applicants performance have
not been found satisfactory/up to the mark and they
have rightly been put under notice before the
order/orders has/have been passed for their
disengagement.

They have further added that pursuant to the fresh
advertisement issued vide their selection process
notified vide orders dated 05.08.2022 and 14.02.2023
etc., various persons, including the applicants have
voluntarily participated in the selection process.
However, they have failed therein and thus, they are
not entitled to challenge the selection process

(21)

competed by the respondents pursuant to such
notifications.

Learned counsel for the respondents further placed
reliance on the law laid down by the Hon'ble Apex
Court in Union of India V/s C Girija, judgment dated
13.02.2019. Paras 13 to 17 of the same thereof:

"13. The law on the subject has been crystallised in
several decisions of this Court.
In

Chandra Prakash Tiwari v. Shakuntala Shukla
, (2002)
6 SCC 127, this Court laid down the principle that
when a candidate appears at an examination without
objection and is subsequently found to be not
successful, a challenge to the process is precluded.
The question of entertaining a petition challenging an
examination would not arise where a candidate has
appeared and participated. He or she cannot
subsequently turn around and contend that the
process was unfair or that there was a lacuna therein,
merely because the result is not palatable.

In
Union of
India v. S. Vinodh Kumar
, (2007) 8 SCC 100, this
Court held that: (SCC p. 107, para 18) "18. It is also
well settled that those candidates who had taken part
in the selection process knowing fully well the
procedure laid down therein were not entitled to
question the same.

(See
Munindra Kumar v. Rajiv
Govil
, (
1991) 3 SCC 368 and Rashmi Mishra v. M.P.
Public Service Commission
, (2006) 12 SCC 724.)"

14. The same view was reiterated in Amlan Jyoti
Borooah, (2009) 3 SCC 227, wherein it was held to be
well settled that the candidates who have taken part in
a selection process knowing fully well the procedure
laid down therein are not entitled to question it upon
being declared to be unsuccessful.

15.
In
Manish Kumar Shahi v. State of Bihar
, (2010)
12 SCC 576, the same principle was reiterated in the
following observations: (SCC p. 584, para 16) "16. We
also agree with the High Court that after having taken
part in the process of selection knowing fully well that
more than 19% marks have been earmarked for viva
voce test, the petitioner is not entitled to challenge the
criteria or process of selection. Surely, if the
petitioner's name had appeared in the merit list, he
would not have even dreamed of challenging the

(22)

selection. The petitioner invoked jurisdiction of the
High Court under
Article 226
of the Constitution of
India only after he found that his name does not figure
in the merit list prepared by the Commission. This
conduct of the petitioner clearly disentitles him from
questioning the selection and the High Court did not
commit any error by refusing to entertain the writ
petition.

Reference in this connection may be made to
the judgments in Madan Lal v. State of J&K, (
1995) 3
SCC 486, Marripati Nagaraja v. State of A.P.
, (
2007)
11 SCC 522, Dhananjay Malik v. State of Uttaranchal
,
(
2008) 4 SCC 171, Amlan Jyoti Borooah v. State of
Assam
, (
2009) 3 SCC 327 and K.A. Nagamani v.
Indian Airlines
, (2009) 5 SCC 515."

16.
In
Vijendra Kumar Verma v. Public Service
Commission
, (2011) 1 SCC 150, candidates who had
participated in the selection process were aware that
they were required to possess certain specific
qualifications in computer operations. The appellants
had appeared in the selection process and after
participating in the interview sought to challenge the
selection process as being without jurisdiction. This
was held to be impermissible.

17.
In
Ramesh Chandra Shah v. Anil Joshi
, (2013) 11
SCC 309, candidates who were competing for the post
of Physiotherapist in the State of Uttarakhand
participated in a written examination held in
pursuance of an advertisement. This Court held that if
they had cleared the test, the respondents would not
have raised any objection to the selection process or
to the methodology adopted. Having taken a chance of
selection, it was held that the respondents were
disentitled to seek relief under
Article 226
and would
be deemed to have waived their right to challenge the
advertisement or the procedure of selection. This
Court held that: (SCC p. 318, para 18) "18. It is
settled law that a person who consciously takes part in
the process of selection cannot, thereafter, turn
around and question the method of selection and its
outcome."

We have pursued the pleadings available on records
and we have also considered the submission made by
the learned counsels for the parties.

(23)

It is not in dispute that the applicants have been
engaged on contract basis on the basis of their
performance by the Competent Authority and they are
still continuing under the respondents in such capacity.
We have also gone through the performance and
appraisal given by the Competent Authority amongst
the respondents and one such being available at
(Annexure A-11 Colly). In the last paragraph of such
appraisal reports the Competent Authority has also
recommended that the amount of increment to be at
7%. Once it is on record that the period of contract
has not ended and even recently, the Competent
Authority amongst the respondents have not only
recommended for extension of contract, but has also
recommended that the increment to be accorded to
the applicants, no prima facie reasons behind the
action/orders of the respondents in requiring the
applicants to participate in another selection process is
found. Further, it is also not the case of the
respondents that subsequent to such recommendation
in the appraisal report, the performance of the
applicants has dropped below the benchmarks and/or
expectation.

No such documents have also been referred to and
brought to our notice.

So far, the law referred to by the learned counsel for
the respondents is concerned once somebody has
taken a chance to participate in a selection process is
precluded from attacking the same selection process,
there is no doubt in our mind about such law.
However, in the facts and circumstances, and that too
at this preliminary stage, we do not find judgment
referred and to relied upon by the learned counsel for
the parties to be of any help to them. It is not
disputed by the learned counsel for the parties that it
is a settled law that one set of contractual employees
is ordinarily not required to be replaced by another set
of contractual employees. We also do not find any
reason that if the applicant selected and engaged by
the Competent Authority through a valid selection
process initiated by them and their contractual period
still exists, the respondents should take any action
and/or pass any order to re-place their service by
another set of contractual employees.

(24)

Prima facie, we find that the claim of the applicants
gets support from the judgment of this Tribunal dated
05.03.2021, wherein the Tribunal has referred to and
relied on the law
laid down by
the Hon'ble Supreme
Court India in the State of Haryana and Ors. V/s Piara
Singh and followed by the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi.
In view of the aforesaid, as an interim measure, the
respondents are directed not to terminate the services
of the applicants and to maintain status quo qua their
services till the next date of hearing.

List the matter for further consideration on
05.04.2023."

3. Accordingly, the OAs have been taken up for final

hearing. However, OA No.556/2023 & OA No.597/2023 have

been taken as lead case with the consent of learned

counsels for both the sides for ease of adjudication. The

respondents have filed counter reply refuting the claims

made in the OAs. The applicant has also filed rejoinder and

additional affidavit to buttress their claim. Further, both the

parties have filed their written submissions.

4. We have perused the pleadings on record and also

heard the learned counsels for both the sides. In support of

his argument that the applicant cannot be allowed to

continue against the contractual post they are holding, the

learned counsel for the respondents draws our attention to

Clause 4 of the newly notified Recruitment Rules of

03.08.2022 which states that all the employees in SAI

working on any of the post mentioned in the Annexure-I on

(25)

the date these rules come into force shall be deemed to

have been appointed under these rules. He submits that

Annexure A-1 indicates the sanctioned posts created in the

new RRs and as no such posts existed earlier applicants

have no claim to continue against the post which no longer

exist. The learned counsels for the applicants on the other

hand argue that since the applicants were appointed to the

various posts, including the post mentioned in Annexure A-

1, they are covered under the aforesaid Clause-4 of the new

Recruitment Rules. In support of such assertion, the

applicants have contended that in fact the same posts have

been advertised such as Physiotherapist, Physiologists and

Nutritionists etc. against which the applicants were working

but in the guise of cadre restructuring/RRs, the respondents

have attempted to replace the services of the applicants with

another set of contractual employees.

5. It has also been contended by the applicants that

while the respondents are well within their right in carrying

out the exercise of cadre restructuring but while doing so,

they cannot replace the services of the applicants with

another set of contractual employees in contravention of law

laid down by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
State of

Haryana vs. Piara Singh
(1992) 4 SCC 118.

(26)

6. Alluding to the advertisement, learned counsels for the

applicants submit that the respondents have initiated

process to make appointment in place of applicants as per

the cited Recruitment Rules which entail that the vacancies

are required to be filled up through an open competition on

regular basis, whereas the respondents have issued

impugned advertisements dated 05.08.2022 and 12.09.2022

to make appointment on contract basis in place of

applicants, which cannot be said to be on regular basis.

7. Learned counsel for the respondents, on the other

hand, submits that the essence of the judgment in the case

of
State of Haryana vs. Piara Singh
(supra), which the

applicants relied upon, is that an adhoc or temporary

employee should not be replaced by another adhoc or

temporary employee and he must be replaced only by a

regularly selected employee. He further argues that this is

not the case of replacement of one set of adhoc or

contractual employees by another set of adhoc or

contractual or temporary employees. This is a case of

appointment of employees in cadre with different

qualifications by a regular process of selection, replacing

those employees who were appointed against non-cadre

posts on adhoc basis without following any Recruitment

(27)

Rules as no Recruitment Rules for appointment were then in

vogue.

8. He draws our attention to the submissions made in the

counter reply in this regard, reiterating that there were no

existing Recruitment Rules and no defined cadre when the

petitioners were appointed by Sports Authority of India for

Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports against Khelo India

project. Recruitment Rules were framed by Respondent

No.1, subsequently providing a cadre of National Centre for

Sports Sciences & Research (NCSSR) with structured

qualifications, following which a regular process of selection

was started for appointment to cadre posts. All the existing

posts were surrendered to MoYS and all the existing

employees were given opportunity to compete in open

selection process along with other qualified for appointment.

This exercise was done as a result of cadre restructuring in

SAI notified by MoYS for all cadres on 22.09.2021. As a

consequence of cadre restructuring, new Recruitment Rules

for different cadres were approved. As per the new

Recruitment Rules notified on 03.08.2022, the total

sanctioned strength for scientific cadre is 384 which also

provides for minimum qualification for each posts. The posts

(28)

were included under two broad categories: High

Performance Analyst and Performance Analyst.

9. The advertisements were accordingly issued against

restructured sanctioned posts for recruitment on contract

basis for a maximum period of 8 years, renewed on annual

basis based on performance. The people who are already

working on contract including the petitioners were given

equal opportunity to apply against newly sanctioned posts

and many of them actually participated in the selection

process. 26 of them were finally selected as per the new

Recruitment Rules. It is further argued that the petitioners

are estopped to challenge the selection process once they

have participated in the selection process. He relies upon the

judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
Union of India vs.

C. Girija
(2019) 15 SCC 633 in support of his contention

and also cites a catena of judgments to contend that no

further stay should be granted in cases of termination of

service. He also submits that the learned counsels for the

applicants have misread that Rule 4 of the new Recruitment

Rules 2022 which clearly mentions that all the employees

who were already working against the sanctioned posts were

deemed to have been appointed under these rules, whereas

there were no sanctioned posts against which the applicants

(29)

were actually appointed. Thus, he makes a distinction within

the class of contractual employees engaged by SAI as non-

cadre and cadre, submitting that the contractual employees

working against the cadre/sanctioned posts under 2022

rules are on a different footing from the applicants.

11. It is not in dispute that the SAI had notified its

services By-Laws and Condition of Service Regulations, 1992

which became effective from 5th September, 1992 wherein

it was stipulated that all actions pertaining to conditions of

services and relating to service matters till the date of

commencement of these rules shall be deemed to have been

taken under the authority of these bye-laws and rules. In

Para 8 of the said regulation under caption "Method of

Recruitment" mentions the following methods:

a) Promotion
b) Direct Recruitment
c) Deputation

d) Re-employment of a retired employee of the
Society or Central/State Government or any other
Organisation

e) On contract for a specified period on technical
personnel on specified terms as approved by
Vice-Chairperson, SAI.

12. The present petitioners who were engaged following

different advertisements circulated/published for

(30)

engagement on contract basis on different dates between

26.10.2020 to 29.01.2021 were engaged following due

process under the category (e) i.e. on contract as

stipulated in the notified rules in 1992. Therefore, even if

their engagement was contractual, this was done as per

the relevant regulation following a selection method.

Thus, the submissions made by the learned counsel for the

respondents that prior to 2022, there were no rules for

selection in place is contrary to above facts.

13. This is also not in dispute that various posts under

the two categories (i) High Performance Analyst (ii)

Performance Analyst, subsequent to restructuring were

advertised. We have perused the advertisement dated

05.08.2022 (Annexure A-2) issued by the SAI which reads

as under:

"ENGAGEMENT OF HIGH PERFORMANCE ANALYST
(Physiotherapists, Strength & Conditioning Experts
Physiologists, Psychologists, Biomechanics,
Nutritionists & Biochemists) On CONTRACT BASIS IN
SAI NCOEs.

Sports Authority of India (SAI) is an autonomous
organization under the administrative control of the
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports with its Head
Quarters at Jawaharlal Nehru Sports Complex, Lodhi
Road, New Delhi-110003

SAI has established 23 National Centres of
Excellence across the country for training of young
and elite athletes in various disciplines. These
NCOEs are funded for several items inter-alia sports

(31)

science staff through Khelo India Scheme of Ministry
of Youth Affairs & Sports. To strengthen the NCOEs,
SAI invites applications from eligible candidates for
engagement as High Performance Anh
(Physiotherapists Strength & Conditioning Experts,
Physiologists, Psychologists, Biomechanics
Nutritionists, & Biochemists) on contract basis at
various SAI NCOEs. The employment is initially for 1
year, further extendable in cycle of 1 year up to a
maximum of 8 years the basis of performance."

14. It is apparent that the engagement of various

categories of posts which were advertised was to be done

on contract basis alone. The advertisement also goes on

to specify their terms of engagement stating that the

engagement is initially for one year, further extendable in

cycle of 1 year upto a maximum of 8 years on the basis of

performance. The advertisement also specifies the posts,

pay, nature of duties, eligibility criteria including the

essential qualification and experience etc. Further, it says

that the contract can be terminated by giving a 30 days'

notice period by either party i.e. SAI and the employee.

15. The plea taken by the learned counsel for the

respondents is that vide this advertisement it was

intended to fill up the various vacancies against the posts

sanctioned whereas in earlier advertisement the posts

were to be filled up against non-sanctioned posts.

(32)

16. We have perused the advertisements against which

the present petitioners were engaged. The advisements

state that the posts are to be filled up on contract basis,

specifying the essential qualification, selection process and

terms of engagement etc. as has been done in the

advertisements of 2022 issued after notification of

Recruitment Rules but neither in the advertisements

against which the applicants were appointed nor the

impugned advertisements mention if the posts are to be

filled in or are sanctioned or non-sanctioned, Or cadre or

non cadre. In their offer of contractual engagement also,

there is no such indication. It has been further stipulated

in the advertisements that they will abide by CCS

(Conduct) Rules, 1964 to the extent of applicability as in

the case of impugned advertisements (Annexure A-6A).

Therefore, we find similarity in the two advertisements

issued and in both the cases the engagement was to be

made on contractual basis.

17. Further, vide Recruitment Rules of 2022, though the

respondents have created two broad categories, High

Performance Analyst and Performance Analyst but the

nomenclature of the posts within their categories and

(33)

responsibilities assigned, has remained the same more or

less, as was the case earlier.

18. This is also not in dispute that the applicants were

appointed through open advertisement on the

recommendations of the select committee constituted by

the competent authority and they also possessed the

requisite qualification as prescribed in the RRs of 2022

after meeting the eligibility criteria and on being found

eligible by duly constituted selection board. It is also seen

that within two groups i.e. High Performance Analyst and

Performance Analyst, the respondents have appointed

persons as Physiotherapists, Nutritionists, Strength &

Conditioning Experts, Anthropometries and Masseurs as in

the case of applicants. There is no significant variation in

the educational qualification either. For example in case of

Physiotherapist, eligibility criteria in the first advertisement

wherein the applicants were appointed was MPT+ 3 years

experience whereas in the new RRs it is BPT + 5 years

experience/MPT + 3 years experience. Similarly in case of

Anthropometries, eligibility criteria in case of applicants

was Masters' Degree in Physical Anthropology or Human

Biology/PHD, whereas in case of newly notified RRs, its

Bachelors' degree in Physical Anthropology or Human

(34)

Biology/Master or higher. A bare reading of the eligibility

criteria with regard to other posts also indicates that by

and large the eligibility criteria has remained the same in

both the cases, albeit it has been reduced/diluted in some

cases in the new RRs, in fact.

19. A perusal of the performance appraisal of the

applicants indicates that it has been adjudged above board

and even recommendations were made for giving

performance based increments, keeping in view their

above par performance.

20. Learned counsel for the respondents has argued that

law of estoppel applies in the case of petitioners as they

themselves appeared in the selection process with regard

to the posts advertised in the context of the notified RRs

and after participating in the process they cannot claim the

relief sought for. However, given higher remuneration and

better prospects if some of the applicants have appeared

for the newly advertised posts, we do not see anything

amiss, more particularly, when they have not questioned

the exercise of cadre restructuring but only objected to

their replacement. The Hon'ble Supreme Court vide Civil

Appeal No.4578-4580/2022 decided on 16.06.2022 in the

case of Krishna Rai (Dead) through LRs, vs BHU

(35)

through Registrar & Ors. held that there cannot be any

estoppels in law and no aggrieved person can be deprived

from his legal right as per the law of the land.

21. To our mind, since the basic principle in vogue is

that the applicants cannot be replaced by another set of

contractual employee, which tantamounts to the

infringement of legal rights of the applicants, the law of

estoppel is not applicable.

22. Learned counsel for the respondents has also placed

reliance on the following judgments:

"a. State of Haryana v. Suman Dutta (2000) 10 SCC
311-Para

b.
State of U.P. v. Sandeep Kumar Balmiki
(2009) 17
755 - Para 5

c.
Bhankara Byas Managing Board v. Suresh-
(2009) 7
SCC 515 - Para2

d.
U.P. Juniors Doctors Action Committee v. B. Sheetal
Nandwani
1992 Supp (1) SCC 680 - Para 8

e.
Air India Limited v. Aditya Beri
2012 SCC Online Del
3014 Para 7

f.
Co-operative Store Ltd., Super Bazaar v. Super
Bazaar Karamchari Hitesh Sangathan
2012 SCC Online
Del 5431 -Para 9

g.
Rohit Sharma v. Union of India & Ors.
2021 SCC
Online Del 2444 Para-10."

23. We have perused the same. The import of such

(36)

judgments is that interim relief especially pertaining to

termination should not be granted in certain circumstances,

such as, when no opinion is expressed about the propriety of

the ground of termination or where if such relief is granted,

the ultimate relief sought is automatically allowed without

permitting the parties to place their respective cases at the

time of final hearing. The judgments also deal with the

issues like grant of interim relief at admission stage, which is

available at disposal of the proceedings or grant of interim

relief against termination while in probation. However, we

find that the ratio of these judgments are not applicable in

the present case. Because at the time of granting interim

relief, prima facie, it was found that the claim of the

applicants was getting sustenance from the judgments of this

Tribunal dated 05.03.2021, wherein the Tribunal had referred

to and relied upon the law
laid down by
the Hon'ble Supreme

Court in the
State of Haryana & Others vs. Piara Singh
as

mentioned. Therefore, as an interim relief, the respondents

were directed not to terminate the services of the applicants

to maintain status quo qua their services till the next date of

hearing.

23. In view of the above discussions, we do not see any

difference between the petitioners and those appointed as

(37)

after notification as per the new RRs on contractual terms.

We also do not find force in the argument that the employees

engaged against advertisement issued in the context or new

RRs were regular contractual employee and thus they were

different from the petitioners. We find that in the instant case

both the petitioners and the persons engaged as per the new

RRs were duly qualified persons and were appointed following

the due process of selection. It is not the case that the new

RRs notified/incorporated some new posts with essential

qualification which the petitioners did not possess. Therefore,

we find that the distinction drawn between the petitioners

and the new appointees is artificial as in both cases,

appointments have been made following the due selection

process with prescribed minimum qualification.

24.
In the case of
Piara Singh
(supra) the Hon'ble Supreme

Court held as follows:

"45. The normal rule, of course, is regular recruitment
through the prescribed agency but exigencies of
administration may sometimes call for an adhoc or
temporary appointment to be made. In such a
situation, effort should always be to replace such an
adhoc/temporary employee by a regularly selected
employee as early as possible. Such a temporary
employee may also compete along with others for such
regular selection/appointment. If he gets selected, well
and good, but if he does not, he must give way to the
regularly selected candidate. The appointment of the
regularly selected candidate cannot be withheld or kept
in abeyance for the sake of such an adhoc/temporary
employee.

(38)

46. Secondly, an adhoc or temporary employee should
not be replaced by another adhoc or temporary
employee; he must be replaced only by a regularly
selected employee. This is necessary to avoid arbitrary
action on the part of the appointing authority."

25. Our considered view is that the instant case is covered

by above notwithstanding the distinction made by the learned

counsel for the respondents within the two sets of employees

who were both contractual.

26. We also find that while the respondents notified the

new RRs in 2022 in doing so the rules notified in 1992

were not superseded. The Sports Authority of India

(Sports Sciences & Sports Medicine) Staff Recruitment

Rules, 1992 in caption "Initial Constitution 4 (a)" provides

the following:

"(a) All the employees in SAI working on adhoc
basis on any of the post mentioned in the schedule
on the date these rules come into force shall, after
the approval by a duly constituted Committee, shall
be deemed to have been appointed under these
rules with effect from a date as may be decided by
the said Screening Committee in each individual
case."

27. Vide new Recruitment Rules 2022 under caption

"Initial Constitution" the following provision was made:

"4. Initial Constitution:- All the employees in SAI
working on any of the post mentioned in the
Annexure-I on the date these rules come into force
shall be deemed to have been appointed under these
rules."

(39)

But there is nothing to indicate that it superseded the

"Initial Constitution" of 1992 rules and ironically both the

rules have continued.

28. Notwithstanding the above, the case remains that

the applicants possessed the prescribed qualifications and

they have been selected through a process of open

competition, therefore, their appointment was not 'illegal'

but irregular and therefore they should be considered as

part of the initial constitution as
laid down in
2022 rules.

Therefore, the right invested in the employees working on

adhoc basis remained intact.
In this regard, we also placed

reliance on
S.S. Moghe and Others vs. Union of India

and Others
(1981) 3 SCC 271, wherein it was held that

when a new service is proposed to be constituted by the

Government, it is fully within the competence of the

Government to decide as a matter of policy the sources

from which the personnel required for manning the Service

are to be drawn.

29. In the facts and circumstances of the case, the OA is

allowed with direction to the competent authority amongst

the respondents to consider the applicants as 'Initial

Constituent' as per 2022 (4) Rules notified on 03.08.2022

and pass an appropriate reasoned order in this regard as

(40)

expeditiously as possible and in any case within 8 weeks of

the receipt of a copy of this order and till service of such

order(s), the applicants will not be terminated. Consequently

the termination orders dated 09.02.2023 and 10.02.2023 are

quashed. No costs.

(Sanjeeva Kumar) (R.N. Singh)
Member (A) Member (J)

/kdr/